# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0058.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 23 January 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tsarong Paljor  
**Name:** Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 67  
**Date of Birth:** 1927  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ] was a Litangba who was sent as the bodyguard/servant/sidekick of Tsipön Namseling by Andrutsang Gombo Tashi. In this interview, he talks about his experiences with Namseling in Lhoka and about Chushigandru in Lhoka.   

---  
### Tape 2  

---

**Q:**  As I mentioned earlier, after leaving Lhasa and arriving at Lhoka, what work did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> do. In 1958, it was said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> rebellion must be subdued and the Chinese also continuously approached the Kashag and so an Assembly meeting was convened. There was a lot of discussions and finally Namseling, Samjola and monastic representatives went. So were the two [government officials] chosen by the government or did the Chinese say that this time Namseling must go?   

**A:**  When the situation got bad, it was said that Mengyiling Dzasa was sent not by the government, but by them [the Chinese]. I don't know how many were sent, but Mengyiling Dzasa was said to be the main one. It was said that the people there [the <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s] got suspicious and had plans to arrest him. I don't know for sure about this because we were in Lhasa. So they couldn't make proper relations there and returned. So then an Assembly meeting was convened. The Chinese knew about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s connection with Andru Jinda [Gombo Tashi] and said that these two were responsible for this Khamba rebellion, so the two are responsible for bringing them [Khambas] back. So he must go and discuss this. If he is successful, then they [the Chinese] have nothing to say. If he is not successful then you [Namseling] are responsible for it. Kungö [Namseling] told me that the Chinese commander was extremely angry. He looked straight at the face of Namseling and banged his fists on the table. Since the Chinese said this, the government met and they sent Samjola along with the representatives of the 3 monasteries. The Lhoji there was Jorgyela who had just arrived there. So it is as I related yesterday. When we got there, we ran into Jamatsang Jinda with Alo Dawa and about 70-100 riders. Namseling joked with Jorgyela saying it's always like this with you. When you were the head of Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> there was the flood. Then he mentioned another disaster. So this is the third time [the fight at Tsetang had started just as he got there]. Tsador Khenjung [the ex-Lhoji] was at Lhüntse dzong. And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had moved from Drigu to a large pasture area between the border and Tawang. We stayed at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> village, which was about an hour or so ride from [the pasture]. Kungö went about 3 times to discuss with them.   

**Q:**  So what were the discussions about?   

**A:**  There wasn't anything to really talk about, right? Andru Jinda was not there. The main ones there were Jonda Chöndze, Kyamgön Chandzö, and Chamdo Dorzinla. He generally asked them how things were progressing and did not talk about them returning. He did not have any thought of telling them to return. The reason for this was that he had done so much and if he returned then it's all finished [MCG: refers to <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>]. So while at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> they moved their headquarters to E Lhagyari. Groups of 100 or so fighters were posted in various regions. So the discussions he had were about such organizational issue and not about them returning. So from Tsöna, we moved to Lhüntse where we stayed at a nearby house of Khongdra. We all stayed there together with Sera Khembo, Gyarong Khembo and Ganden Gusho. It was there that Tsador Khenjung arrived. So a meeting took place and some were saying that they wanted to return after some time. Namseling said that this is not at all possible. That we must unite and push together and don't just think single handily. So they all agreed. I sort of joked and said what are we going to do if the Chinese suddenly come. Are we going to say that we have come to discuss and so start discussing or are we going to fight or whatever. Tsador Khenjung said he will never surrender and will die right there. We will all fight. So they all agreed. So the idea of returning, from that moment on, did not exist.   

**Q:** When you got to Lhoka, Andru Jinda was in Kham [MCG in Pembar]. What is mentioned in some documents is that the organization suffered and the leaders did not get along and there were some problems, right?   

**A:**  Not much, just a bit.   

**Q:**  Since Andru Jinda was not there and they were divided into various sections (shoga) so they choose their own leader, right?   

**A:**  From Lhasa there were [already] leaders from the various shoga) and so that continued. For example from Chamdo there was Chamdo Dorzin. Likewise Derge had Jag <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje. Among the Tiu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> there was Kyamgön Chandzö. It seems he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Druk Kyamgön [MCG note: Radrü Ngawang's interview disagrees]. Then there was Jama Jinda and Alo Dawa. The main one was Jonda Chöndze. He was calm and collected and reliable and wrote well. The late <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> always met him and he regarded him well. When we were at Lhüntse secret letters arrived which were given to Jonda Chöndze. He made corrections and also used to say to burn the letters and not keep them. Around that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Nyendrala arrived from India to E. So Namseling was very happy and said he thought things would go well. Baba Yeshe, he also came from India. He really sacrificed a lot. He had 60-70 animals, though I did not see them. He said that they were all for the use of Chushigandru. He loaned us 12 animals.   

**Q:**  I'm asking this question since it's said in some documents that the organization of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was good when Andru was there, but then there were internal problems so Chushigandru could not be relied on.   

**A:**  This is not correct. There are too many instances of likes and dislikes.   

**Q:**  It's also said that there were some problems with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Chushigandru. What was that about?   

**A:**  Yes, there were a few. There were no problems at all with regard to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> getting along internally. The ones who were at E Lhagyari were one organization [unit]. Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje never came [to the main base]. That's an indication that there were some problems. He was somewhere at Kongpo-Dakpo and they had their base there. It really doesn't matter, right? As long as they held on to some place there. It was kind of said that there was no difference between Andru Jinda and Namgyal Dorje. Andru Jinda was not there and so Namgyal Dorje did not come to the main camp at E. So it was something as if he would lead his own followers since Andru was not there.   

**Q:**  So the others were not listening?   

**A:**  There wasn't anything like that. Each continued his routine. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje with his Derge followers had their base. At the main base there was Kyamgön Chöndze. The others said that they were the main base. So it was just this talk and nothing else. The reason why <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> had some problems-I was not at the meeting since he asked me to accompany Gombo Khangsar's daughter who was a nun to a place a day's ride away. At the meeting they agreed to begin the [age] 18-60 [conscription system for peasant recruits to fight]. Notices were sent to Kongpo and all of the southern areas, that is, to all places south of Nangkartse. These were sent to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་གཞིས] A government estate; an estate that belonged to a dzong (district).">dzongshi</a> telling them to come. It is said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> were not there, and I was not there. The prominent ones from all the regions came and all met in the large hall of our host Gombo Khangsar's house. The meeting went on for 2 days. It seemed that there were some arguments. The 18-60 recruitment call was decided upon and signed (seals were affixed). The idea was to hold on to the areas in the Southern regions. Since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was the more powerful, they were to protect/defend on the outside [outer fringes]. There were really no objections about that, but later it was said that Namseling wanted to send them to the North. Just calling up 18-60-year-olds would not help, isn't it? The problem was that there were no arms. When they [Chushigandru] first arrived each brought their own guns and so for about every 100 soldiers we had about 60-70 guns. The Americans had dropped arms about 2-3 times, maybe about 200-300 [guns]. There were 303 rifles like the ones that were called Tashi Kharing. There were about 2-3 mortars.   

**Q:**  Did the people know that the Americans were helping and did they have high hopes?   

**A:**  Yes, they knew and had high hopes.   

**Q:**  So after it [the arms] was dropped did they say it was useless? That it's too little.   

**A:**  There were not enough of them and the arms were just ordinary ones that were used in Tibet. They were like the Inji Kharing and no machine guns types. A few boxes of bullets were dropped, but in the meantime the uprising started. We had no arms and everyday the emergency level increased. So there we were without arms and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Nyendrala had come from Kalimpong where they had met some Guomindang people who promised to help in any manner. He said [told to Namseling] that we will definitely receive help. So Jonda Chöndze and Nyendra were sent [by Namseling]. So at the time of the uprising the two were not there.   

**Q:**  So were they able to bring back arms?   

**A:**  No chance. We were losing ground. The American help it was strange. People like Athar said that the help only comes on the 15th day and when the moon's out and the sky is clear. It's said that some [boxes] were carried away by the wind, others crashed somewhere. We did not see this, but lots of things like this were said.   

**Q:**  It seems that there were a lot of problems. In intelligence work it's said that only the arms available in the country are dropped, etc.   

**A:**  I see. Those of us who came [from Lhasa to Drigutang] had our own bullets, about 100. The wealthier ones had about 1-2 thousand rounds. That was all. The government could not give us any, right? So it was very difficult and so Nyendrala and Jonda Chöndze were sent [by <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>]. After that, the uprising started and so one was left not knowing what to do. Namseling said that we must go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to bring His Holiness. So they went to discuss this with Chushigandru. Then Kunga Samden and some other Litangba were sent to Norbulinga. Then people like Seysey from Targye Gomba were told to go via Gokala. There was also a monk official who Namseling said had to go. At the pass they met the Chinese and had to withdraw the monk official was left behind . He did return later, but it was said that he was complaining a lot; saying that they did not give me any notice [when they left].   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was established at Drigutang. Besides organization, they had to have food, and appoint stewards [Tib. ཉེརཔ]. How was that done? Did the kungös [Namseling and Samjo] secretly tell the government estates [Tib. ཛོངཤི] to give supplies? How was it done?   

**A:**  This had already been established earlier; like with creating the Phogang. It didn't need to do anything special because they were getting so many contributions from the various labrangs, etc., for example, 5,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain, 10,000 khe, and some gave 3-4000 khe. This was very good. The poorer people did not have anything to give right? But they [Namseling and them] did not take from the government's granaries. We didn't think that was possible. The kungös had better <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, but we did not (have good tsamba). It was not easy to immediately get meat and butter. There were times when we ate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་ཐུག] A soup made from water and tsampa. It can also include meat, cheese, etc., depending on wealth.">tsamthug</a> without meat, etc. The soldiers had salary and there was the Phogang. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> were complaining a lot.   

**Q:**  Yes, there was a lot of talk about that, that they [Khambas] stole, etc., right?   

**A:**  As far as that is concerned, there were a few instances of robbery. Such instances would take place, that's understandable, right? But the majority was really good. Then there were the false Khambas [Tib. khamdzün]. There were Chinese also. I don't know whether they were spies or what but about 60-70 of them were arrested [by Chushigandru].   

**Q:**  Yes, there was talk of false Khambas.   

**A:**  Besides that, there were Chinese. They said that they were running away. There were 60-70 who were arrested and imprisoned. Then there were villagers who said that they were Khambas and robbed and spoke Kham dialect. Then there were few of our fighters who were bad character. When they got to wealthier households it is said that they robbed them.   

**Q:**  Well, such things will take place. Wherever there are soldiers, these things happen.   

**A:**  Yes, all kinds of things can happen, right? Some were excellent and one begins to realize "how wonderful." In Tibet, it's very cold isn't it? They stay all night in tents and I used to wonder how they do it and how they survive and I used to think, "how good." I myself would have had difficulties staying like that.   

**Q:**  Later it was said that from all the various districts, from Kongpo onwards, people volunteered and about 10,000 people were recruited. So was there an attempt to recruit from various districts?   

**A:**  Yes, the people aged 18-60 were called.   

**Q:**  In which places?   

**A:**  At E. I just told you about the meeting. Yes. At that meeting they decided summon those aged 18-60. I don't know whether they were able to [actually] recruit them or not. The situation was at such emergency level. There were no arms also.   

**Q:**  In the meeting, did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> come or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a>?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> came. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> told me that from Nangkartse some monk official called Gyawoo came. One of the main persons was Khotsa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> from Dakpo. He was a very determined and a decisive person, very articulate and learned.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he a relation of Kungö Draktenla? His elder brother?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. He was some relation. He was one of the main ones. The others, I don't know. I don't think the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> were there, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> from the various areas were there.   

**Q:**  It must be that as government officials the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> could not openly come. Now in Kalimpong, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and it's said that they consulted Phala. So did Kungö [Namseling] have connections with that group in terms of secret letters, etc.?   

**A:**  No, nothing at all. They did not have any relations at all. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> had connections with Lhasa. I don't know anything, but my younger brother came from Kalimpong [he's in Gangtok now]. He told me that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> [Gyalo Thondup] had sent him. He brought a small pistol and a letter. Sawangchemmo told him not to contact anyone, but just to give the letter to Khenjung at Gyambumgang. They were staying at (unclear) and I met him there and he said that he couldn't go in person so he asked me to give the letter. He showed me the place also. I called him, he came and I delivered the letter. So that was all.   

**Q:**  What's you brother's name? Was he at Drigutang?   

**A:**  Kesang. He's in Gangtok.   

**Q:**  Earlier you mentioned that at Lhüntse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> there was a meeting in which <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> said that they should never return. At Lhüntse dzong there was the idea of establishing a new government with the hope of returning to Lhasa later, right?   

**A:**  When we were at Lhüntse, all at the meeting decided to stay. Regarding the establishment of the government, this was after His Holiness left Lhasa and arrived at Chongye Riu Dechen. That is when His Holiness spoke [of the new government]. Andru Dzasa and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> were appointed as the main persons. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey was appointed as an assistant to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> dzasa. When His Holiness left for India, Kundeling Dzasa and Amdo Lekshey did not stay and left. After His Holiness left Lhasa, some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and Gusung soldiers returned. Among the Trapchi soldiers was the Commander Tashi Berala. When we were going back and forth around Jedeshöl, they were coming from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> and its said that they were staying at E Chondojang. They kept the soldiers there and Namseling sent a few letters to them. They did not reply and Namseling was disappointed that he [Tashi Bera] was staying there with the soldiers since they really needed the soldiers at Tsetang. So His Holiness had left and it's as I have told you last time, letters arrived saying that Andru Jinda was at this and that place. Andru Jinda had heard over the radio that the uprising had taken place. So they immediately proceeded day and night. When they arrived at Kongpo Giamda he heard that Lhasa was lost. From the Kham side, and at Po, it was said that there were thousands of vehicles. Andru Jinda had to come that way. He [Andru] said that on that day they lost most of the arms they had captured. Then he was able to cross the river and come to where we were. So we were receiving letters and at the same time people were fleeing. We, on the other hand, went to Jedeshöl. Then we stayed at Trandrug, then Yarlung Phodrang. So in this way, we waited for Andru. Namseling was told that everyone is fleeing and so isn't what we have done enough now? Now there's nothing to hope for. But he said he has to meet Andru otherwise his work is not completed. And so we waited. Then he went to Lhüntse and within 3-4 days Andru arrived. Its as I have told you. Andru told Namseling to go to India to get permission to use their land. And so we left (for India).   

