# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0058.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 23 January 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tsarong Paljor  
**Name:** Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 67  
**Date of Birth:** 1927  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ] was a Litangba who was sent as the bodyguard/servant/sidekick of Tsipön Namseling by Andrutsang Gombo Tashi. In this interview, he talks about Litang in the early years and then the early period of Chushigandru in Lhasa, including their "demonstration" in Lhasa in 1957. He also discusses Namseling's relations with Phala, Gombo Tashi and others and Namseling's appointment to a delegation that was sent to talk with the Khambas in Lhoka in 1958.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0058_01/H_0058_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  I am 67.   

**Q:**  What is your name?   

**A:**  My name is Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ].   

**Q:**  The Communist Chinese won the war in China in 1949 and at that time they were saying that they are going to liberate Tibet. That was before Chamdo was lost. Were you staying in Kham at that time?   

**A:**  At that time, I was in Tibet [Political Tibet]. When the Communist started coming, probably, I was about 14 years old. In the beginning, we heard that the Communists were man-eaters and that they will take away the small children and they will kill the elderly. All people were very afraid of them. I didn't know whether it was just a rumor. At that time, all the people living in the upper and lower part of Litang ran away to the forest. At that time, there weren't any soldiers and the state [government] [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཁབ] in that place and during the time of our grandfathers and grandmothers was the Guomindang who had come to that place. After that, there wasn't any control from the [Tibetan] Government, but the Chinese also couldn't occupy it completely. So we just remained scattered in between and we lived in our villages separately. There wasn't any kind of government. After that, we heard that the Chinese were coming through Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག]. I was just a child and when it was heard that the [Chinese] were very bad, they conscripted all the fathers of the households. Normally, each household would keep a gun; they were not allowed to remain without a gun. The bigger households were told to keep about 2-3-5-6-7 guns. It was just like imposing a tax. So the fathers of each family went out as soldiers and they said that they are going to stop the [Communist] Chinese. We were living at the place called Molashingpa located down there in the Minyag area a two days journey from Litang. When the Chinese came up, they ambushed the Chinese and fought each other quite severely. A few of our people were killed and they also killed and wounded a few [Chinese]. After that, the Chinese were coming up like a water flowing and we just had some fathers [heads] of the households. Therefore, they had to run away. At that time, they dug pits and all of the wealth was hidden underground, and all people were ready to leave. After that, there were different people running away and they were coming to the place where we were living. My father came back last, at night. As soon as the fathers came back, they had brought their wives and children, they ran away. We were left behind because my father didn't come back. After that, my father came when it was almost dark and then collected our things and ran away. There was a river called Lichu [Tib. ལི་ཆུ] flowing below the monastery. It was as big as the Lhasa River. We crossed the bridge over the river and then there was a very large forest area. Normally, people didn't dare to go in there, but at that time, everyone ran away into the dense forest. Everyone brought their horses, mules, sheep and goats into the forest. After two days, we saw that the soldiers [Chinese] had arrived in the fields and they were practicing drills and blowing trumpets, and they were making fires everywhere. After that, some of the fathers gathered together and went to wait to ambush the Chinese. They killed many of them [Chinese] and they also seized the people who were like sick and tired and killed them and threw their bodies in the river. Some of them were brought on the bridge and then shot and then they threw the bodies into the river. After that, they [Chinese] went to the Litang Monastery and then went back through Xining. When I was about 20 years old I came up to Lhasa. At that time, Lhasa was calm. People were just saying that the Communists will come. After that, the Chinese came up from Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Were you in Lhasa before the Chinese came to Chamdo?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, I heard that people could get a very high price for cigarettes and other things that the Chinese soldiers needed in Kham. There were a lot of traders going down there [to Kham]. I also went with some partners and fortunately we met a person who was a kind of worker or a cadre for the Chinese and we went together. After crossing the Shargongla [Tib. ཤར་གོང་ལ] mountain pass, we arrived at Jagra Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར]. The Chinese had already arrived there. At that time, the Tibetan soldiers were staying in Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ] and Kongpo Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ] and small number of monk soldiers [Tib. སེར་དམག] from Sera and Drepung were also staying in Giamda. I was also a monk. When they heard that the monk soldiers were coming, about 15-20 Chinese soldiers were carrying guns and looking around where we were staying and they asked us questions. Our partner who was from Kongtserawa [Tib. ཀོང་རྩེ་ར་བ] spoke Chinese fluently and told the Chinese that they are just my partners and they are traders. The Chinese trusted him because probably, they were friendly to each other. At that time, they [Chinese] were very poor and they didn't have vehicles. They were not suspicious of us and they were throwing their guns on the floor and sleeping. When we came back, the monk soldiers also had withdrawn from Giamda.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were only a small number of monk soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were just few of them. It was just in name only. There were only about a hundred.   

**Q:**  Actually, there were about 20,000 monks in the three great monasteries, but probably there were just a few of them came, right?   

**A:**  If there would be about 2,000-3,000, the Tibetan people were kind of strange. In Chushigandru, among 60-70 people, only 50 people had guns. But they could stop 500-600 Chinese soldiers. It was kind of different and strange. If there would be a large number of Tibetan soldiers, they could handle the Chinese. But we didn't have solidarity. So it became like what happened. After that, I came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was a monk in Drepung, but sometimes I used to go to do trading. Once, I went to Po Tramog [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་སྤྲ་རྨོག] for trade. When I was in Tramog, one morning at about 2-3 a.m. I heard some gunshots. Later, I heard that the regiment in Tramog just fired cannons casually 4-5 times. The next morning some people were just guessing or telling lies and said a white plane came over. So they fired the cannons at that. Actually, at that time, the war in Litang might have taken place. After that, when I was coming to Lhasa, I saw that the [PLA] soldiers who were on the Tibet side were going in the direction of Kham. Probably, they were taking them as reinforcement to Litang. When I arrived at Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གོང་དཀར], I heard that the war in Litang had taken place. At that time, I was living in Gyambumgang where there was a house that belonged to our khamtsen. All the people were very anxious and they were saying that war had taken place in our homeland. Since then, Chushigandru started.   

**Q:**  Were you staying in Lhasa in the years 1951-52-53-54?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa in the years 51-52-53. In 1954, when the Dalai Lama went to China, I was in Tramog.   

**Q:**  In 1951, there was a People's Association called the Water-Dragon Year Mimang [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས]. It was not the People's Association of Alo Chöndze. It was before that and in it there were Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] and Jayan Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ]. Alo Chöndze's People's Association was set up in 1954. Do you have anything to tell me about this?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this. At that time, I was just going to the countryside. I think they had a relationship with our late Kungö [Namseling]. When Alo Chöndze was arrested, Chushigandru had already started and our late Kungö was very worried about Alo Chöndze's arrest and he said that we definitely have to try to get him released. But at that time I didn't have any idea about him. Probably, the Chinese were saying that Sera and Drepung should be the guarantor. And I heard that there was some kind of internal disagreement in Sera and Drepung regarding that matter and that some people said that we couldn't bear the responsibility if we act as the guarantor for the release of Alo Chöndze. At that time, Kungö was kind of agitated and told some people who came to him, "This is not good." Therefore, I thought that he might have relations with them.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama came back from China, the Chinese set up the Preparatory Committee [Tib. གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] of the Tibet Autonomous Region. At that time, Chushigandru offered a golden throne to the Dalai Lama. This was done for the purpose of establishing their organization, right?   

**A:**  The main cause of the start of Chushigandru was because the war had taken place in Litang. In the beginning there wasn't any Chushigandru. The people of Ba ['ba'] Litang and Gyaltang [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཐང], i.e., Baligyesum, gathered together and among them Litang was the main force. They got together and rose up at the end of 1956.   

**Q:**  In Litang, mainly, the monastery was doing the work, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there both nomads and farmers in Litang?   

**A:**  Litang is a very large area where there were about 4-5 nomad areas such as Yönru [Tib. གཡོན་རུ], Uthog Sumbo [Tib. དབུ་ཐོག་སུམ་བ྄ོ], Khaha Juru and Gembo.   

**Q:**  Was that the 18 kind of groups that I heard were called the 18 Getsang or something like that?   

**A:**  At that time, there were 16 residential dormitory units (khamtsen) in the monastery. The monks in these 16 khamtsen were from 16 different places. There were nomads and also many farmers. We were kind of half farmers and half nomads [in Litang]. There was the [agricultural] places called Mola Shingpa and there was a place called Tsosumdo [Tib. ཚོ་གསུམ་མདོ], Rongpa. All of these places could get two crops in a year.   

**Q:**  I heard that many people went into the monastery [for safety] and that they [Chinese] bombed the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that happened, they talked about setting up Chushigandru, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was just after that was taking place in Litang. The people from Baligyesum who were then in Lhasa gathered together. On the 3rd of the 1st Tibetan month and at the end of 1956, we went to oppose [the Chinese]. This was the beginning of it. It was said that all people from Baligyesum should gather together. Altogether, probably there were about 700 riders, and we went to borrow guns from the aristocratic households [Tib. གཟིམ་ཤག] and many of us had a rifle and a pistol. There wasn't anybody who didn't have a gun. We gathered in the courtyard of Andru [Gombo Tashi]. Then the riders rode in line through the Barkor Street and went to the place where people used to celebrate the birthday of the Dalai Lama [Tib. འཁྲུངས་ལྷ་དབྱར་གསོལ] and we burned incense like people normally did on the 3rd of the 1st Tibetan month. We burned incense and yelled, "May the gods be victorious." [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ་བཏང] and they shot a lot of guns. The Chinese were kind of strange. At that time, they [the Khambas] shot several thousands of rounds and they [the Chinese] were not looking at it.   

**Q:**  Didn't they say anything?   

**A:**  They didn't. I was wondering what would happen? Some people also set up some sentries and made some preparations. After that, we rode back through the Barkor Street and went to the courtyard of Andru. At that time, there were a lot of people serving beer and food for us while we were still carrying our rifles on our backs. Then we drank beer and danced. On the next day, I heard that a Chinese official sent his interpreter who was from Litang to us and he said, "You shouldn't act like that. This is too much and it is very dangerous." The interpreter was pretending that he came to say this internally [unofficially] though actually he was sent by the Chinese. I heard that they [Khambas] also sent a message [back] through the interpreter saying, "The Chinese collected a lot of taxes when the traders went to trade in Xining and they robbed a lot of their merchandise or paid a very little money for the merchandise and this made the traders to go bankrupt, so we can't tolerate this." After that, it was calm and we did the preparations and stayed in Lhasa for about a year.   

**Q:**  While you were in Lhasa, did you hold meetings and talk to each other?   

**A:**  Yes, the meetings were in the Andru's house almost all the time. Andru had sacrificed everything. At that time, there were many people in Andru's house. Some of them were holding meetings and some of them were performing rituals. Gyado Thöndrub [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་དོན་གྲུབ] and I also went at night to Andru's house and stayed on the roof [as guards]. At that time, probably some kind of evil spirit [Tib. སྲི] was rising up and the dogs were running everywhere. At that time, there was also Jagö Namgyal Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ] and Amdo Jimpa [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་སྦྱིན་པ]. I heard they were the sponsors of the Kalachakra [Tib. དུས་འཁོར་དབང་ཆེན] Initiation and the Dalai Lama agreed to do the initiation. They also prepared to offer the golden throne to the Dalai Lama. I think that at that time the [Tibetan] government secretly gave the name Chushigandru, but probably, they didn't meddle into it [the organization]. One day I asked him [Namseling] whether the government is doing anything. He said, "The government is keeping quiet." I said, "I don't think it would be useful if we would do this exclusively [by ourselves], so isn't the government doing anything?" He kind of scolded me saying, "What the hell are you talking about? This is not the case. If we, the government did something openly, the Dalai Lama is here. In case something bad happened to him, then we are finished." Then I thought that it was kind of secret.   

**Q:**  Did the late Kungö tell you this?   

**A:**  Yes. Chushigandru exclusively would not be able to do anything. After that, the situation in Lhasa was changing day by day and the Chinese were preparing [for war] and they were building bunkers everywhere using huge rocks that even a hundred people can't lift up. Probably, they used machines for bringing those rocks. Otherwise, even a hundred people also wouldn't be able to move it. At that time, there were Chinese regiments staying in the Trip area [Tib. གྲིབ], and around the Sera Monastery and in Drepung in Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག] as well as in Gyangdralinga [Tib. རྒྱང་གྲགས་གླིང་ག]. At night, they were shooting some kind of red and green flares and shooting guns which made the people unable to stay. At that time, I was wondering what would happen and I thought, it would be out of question for us to be able to handle the Chinese. In the beginning, I didn't know our late kungö. At that time, Gyado Thöndrub told me that Andru Jinda [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] [Gombo Tashi] is asking me to come. When I went there, Jinda said, "The two of us have something to tell you, and you should do it." I said, "Yes, what do you have to tell me?" He said, "We want you to go to Namseling." I said, "I swear by the Three Jewels. I don't know Namseling and I can't do anything because I am just one person. I am afraid I can't go." Then he said, "Namseling is a very important person. He is the main advisor of our organization and he is a person to emulate [Tib. མིག་དཔེ་ལྟ་ས]. In any case, you have to go there. You are our best, trustworthy person. What you have to do is to supervise some of the false Khambas [Tib. ཁམས་རྫུས] who might come to see Namseling pretending to be from Chushigandru." I said, "I can't do anything because I am one person. I am afraid I can't go." Then he said, that they will prepare 10-15 people. But, after that, the situation was kind of chaotic and I had to go to Namseling. At that time, his wife was in India and there was only Kungö and the servants. Then all of a sudden many Chinese were arrested [on 1 April 1958].   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese arrested and sent back to the China at night?   

**A:**  Yes. And there were some Chinese secretly hiding among us. There was a Chinese man who used to come to Gyado Thöndrub. He was also arrested and taken away. He had asked Thöndrub to keep some of his money and things and Thöndrub told another Chinese to hand over the money to him. It was said there were tens of thousands of Chinese yuan. They planned to secretly put the money in the bag for the bedding and not tell the Chinese that the money was in the bedding. Thöndrub said that he was not sure whether he received the money or not. At that time, the Chinese were planning to attack us after arresting the Chinese. The Chinese had already settled their regiments in Lhasa. Our late Kungö was probably doing a lot of secret work. Sometimes, he used to meet Andru Jinda. After that, all of a sudden they went to Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ].   

**Q:**  At that time, the Khambas didn't have relations with the government, but Namseling knew all about that, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Probably, Drönyerchemmo Phala also knew about that, right?   

**A:**  Sometimes, in the evenings, Phala would come to see Namseling, but he wouldn't come to Andru so our late Kungö would then go to Andru. I think they had a relationship.   

**Q:**  Who else came to see your Kungö?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda and Gyado Thöndrub used to come to [visit] him.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that Namseling was working under the Drönyerchemmo and there was also the Tseja head, Gyentsenla [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] and he had the monk official Tema Joka [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོགས་པ] working for him. Did Depön Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] come to Namseling?   

**A:**  At that time, Our Kungö was going to see Tashi Bera. At that time, I had to go with him keeping a gun in my sleeve. He also used to see the ex-abbot, Gyume Khensur [Tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད་མཁན་ཟུར] who later died in America. Our Kungö had the main relationship with Andru Jinda and Gyado Thöndrub. At that time, probably, our Kungö was giving the approval for doing things and Jinda was putting it into action. At that time, a German would come to see our Kungö on Saturdays or Sundays and stay for about 10 minutes and then leave. When he came, Kungö would tell me to leave.   

**Q:**  In 1958, all of them went to Drigutang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you go to Drigu also?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. I was still staying with Kungö. After they went to Drigu, I heard that they went to Tsöna [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ] on the border of Tawang. When the Khambas had their regiment in Drigu, I heard that the Dzasa Mengyiling [Tib. ཛ་སག་སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང] was sent there to talk with the Khambas [Note: this was the first delegation sent by the Kashag]. I didn't know him. Probably, he was close to the Chinese. Actually, the Khambas didn't have anything to talk about. The Khambas thought that Mengyiling was not good and they said, "We should arrest him." And he was almost arrested, so holding talks became out of question and he was unable to make any connections with the Khambas and he ran away back [to Lhasa]. At that time, the Chinese didn't know what to do and then all of a sudden, they held a meeting.   

**Q:**  Was that the meeting to "Mollify the Central Committee and Calm the Khamba's disturbance [Tib. ཀྲུང་དབྱང་དགོངས་པ་དྭངས་ཐབས་དང་ཁམས་པའི་ཟིང་ཆ་འཇགས་ཐབས]?   

**A:**  Yes. I can't tell you about it in detail, but I heard that the [Chinese] Tibet Area Military Headquarters [Tib. བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང] called our Kungö to a meeting. I heard that Kungö Depön Taklha, [who was the Dalai Lama's brother-in-law] [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་མདའ་དཔོན] and the Commander of the Dalai Lama's Bodyguard Regiment was also there and he was astonished. At the meeting, they talked about Chushigandru. The Chinese told our Kungö, "You were the person who did all the reckless things" and they banged their fist on the table. They told Kungö, "You were the person who started Chushigandru and they made relations with you. Now you have two paths at the front of you. You should go to talk with the Khambas and you should be able to bring them back and calm down the situation. If you can do this, it will be okay and we won't have anything to say to you. Otherwise, you will have to bear all the responsibility of this." Then the meeting was over. At that time, our late Kungö was the main person going to talk with the Khambas and there were two abbots from Sera and Drepung, the one from Drepung was named Gyarong Khembo [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང་མཁན་པོ] and the Ngagpa Khembo [Tib. སྔགས་པ་མཁན་པོ] was from Sera. The abbot of Ganden didn't come, but there was a monk, probably he was a high ranking monk administrator in Ganden. It was said that the Governor of Lhoka, the Lhoji and Trekhang Khenjung [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང་མཁན་ཆུང] [Samjola] will also work as Kungö's colleagues. After that, we prepared for 2-3 days and at that time, our late lady [Tib. ལྕམ] [Mrs. Namseling] had also come back from India. At that time, we were very worried that our Kungö might be arrested.   

**Q:**  When he was told to go to talk, he was very happy, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He said [to me], "This worked out so well that I could go there. Now everything is okay." Then he told his wife to go to exchange money and go to India as soon as possible. You shouldn't stay here." Then we left Lhasa for Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Did all of them [in the delegation] go to Lhoka together at the same time?   

**A:**  No, we didn't leave at the same time, but from that day, we were kind of together. The other servants and horses and mules were sent through the Kuru Bridge. Our Kungö, Trekhang Khenjung and I went to Kundeling and then we crossed the ferry site and stayed over night in Ramagang where there was an estate that belonged to the Yabshi family. At that time, the horses and mules and servants had already arrived there. Our Kungö and Trekhang talked with Kundeling Dzasa for about 2-3 hours. After that, we went to Lhoka Jedeshöl [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ] and finally, we arrived at Chongye Riu Dechen [Tib. འཕྱོང་རྒྱས་རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན]. In that place, there were about 70-80 cavalry saying that they were Chushigandru headed by Jamatsang [Tib. བྱ་མ་ཚང] and Alo Dawa [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཟླ་བ]. They said that they want to attack the Chinese regiment at Gangbu in Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Were they fighting in Tsetang?   

**A:**  No. They said they were going to fight in Tsetang. We just met them on our way. At that time, they were also kind of frightened because we also had about 30-40 riders. All of them were cavalries and they galloped their horses up the mountain trying to seize a [defensive] place and they were carrying guns and scattered everywhere. At that moment, I went forward and told them that we had came for this purpose and that Kungö has come. Then they came over and we held a meeting in a household there and talked for about an hour. I was staying outside, so I didn't hear what they were saying, but Kungö told me that he told the Khambas not to make the war for a while and don't behave overly eager, but probably they won't listen to me and they might fight. Then we went up and arrived at the place where there was an estate that belonged to Shölkang [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] and probably we stayed there or we stayed in Chongye. Anyway, the Khambas went down and attacked the Chinese Regiment and fought about one day or a couple of hours. However, they couldn't stay for a long time because they would have a food problem. On the next day, they also fought with the Chinese, but by that time the Chinese had increased their soldiers. The Chinese regiment at Gangbu was near to the residence of Governor of Lhoka and the Chinese had dug tunnels inside the mountains and that made it more safe for them. They erected a red flag on the top of the mountain. The Khambas surrounded the Chinese and fought a very long time until the whole area was lost. The Chinese had a very hard time and some of them didn't get drinking water and food. So they went out secretly to steal things. At that time, quite a lot of Khambas were killed and there were 60-70 Khamba soldiers wounded. Some of them were also arrested when they fell asleep in the tunnels and probably, quite a lot of them were also killed. In Tsetang, Jama Jinda and his people had been making war. In the beginning, the people who were sent to make connections with them [Chushigandru] by the [Tibetan] government met the Khambas in that place and they probably told the Khambas, "You should not make the war in a hasty manner. You should hold on a little bit and then we are going to do something." But, since they didn't have much [understanding of] politics, they didn't listen to them and said, "This time, there is no other choice other than to fight." And they might have yelled and charged forward. But they could keep on fighting for only several hours. At that time, the main regiment of Chushigandru was set up on a big pasture between Tsöna and Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང]. The Khambas we met were just a branch of them sent to that place. It took many days to get to the main regiment. Sometimes, we had to camp on remote places and we didn't get any tea and such stuffs and the weather was very cold. We just slept on the pasture. On the next day, we arrived at Tsöna. Then Kungö went to the border of Tawang where the main regiment was to talk with the Khambas. Probably, we stayed for about 20 days in Tsöna. Actually, they didn't have much to talk about.   

**Q:**  Did they [Namseling, etc] tell the Khambas about the content of the meeting in Lhasa to cease the Khamba's disturbance and so on?   

**A:**  They didn't, and they also couldn't say that. They just left them as before and gave them advices or instructions [Tib. བཀའ་སློབ ] to do this and that.   

**Q:**  Before they left, the Kashag might have given some orders, right?   

**A:**  Probably, the Kashag didn't have much to say. It was decided [to do] whatever the Chinese said. Kungö told me that the Chinese told him, "You should talk and bring back the Khambas. If this could be done, then everything will be okay. If you can't cease the disturbance, you have to bear all the responsibilities." But it was difficult for him to tell the Khambas to come back because they won't listen to it and it would be useless also, but Kungö had to bear a very big responsibility.   

**Q:**  From the beginning, your Kungö didn't have any plan to come back, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was saying, "Now, this worked out so well. I can really do something." At that time, he was thinking it would be good to go outside rather than stay in the chaotic [Tib. ཟིང] situation. When we left Lhasa, each of us took tsamba, dry meat and butter in bags. After they arrived at Drigu and set up their regiment then they also discussed setting up another regiment in Tsöna. I heard that there was a secret ammunition dump in Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] that belonged to the Tibetan Government. The government agreed to give it to Chushigandru. Therefore, Andru led 1,000 riders and went to get that.   

**Q:** At that time, probably, the government told the monastery about that, right?  

**A:**  Not really the government, but our late Kungö and [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Probably, Phala was also involved in that, right?   

**A:**  Probably. Mainly the government was involved in that, but our late Kungö was the main person with whom they [Khambas] made relations and our Kungö was very close to the Phala Drönyerchemmo. When he came to meet him, I couldn't listen to what they were talking about. I used to close the door and go out. [068] At that time, we were staying in Drepung at the time when the Dalai Lama was taking his Geshe exam. Our Kungö heard about that on that very day and he said, "Now it is finished [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་སོང], the Chinese spy had run away and entered the Chinese Regiment in Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག]. [talking in general about hearing the battles in Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ] and getting the guns from Ganden Chöngor and Andru got wounded.] At that time we were in Tsöna. After that, the regiment of Chushigandru moved to E lhagyari [Tib. ཨེ་ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི] and then we came out from Tsöna and we stayed in Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ] for about 6 months. I had to go from Lhüntse to E Lhagyari twice because they had the secret conversations and I went to deliver the letters. At that time, the main leaders of the main [Chushigandru] regiment were Jangtsa Chöndze [Tib. འཇང་ཚ་ཆོས་མཛད], Chamdo Dotse [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་རྡོ་ཚེ], Kyamgön Chandzö [Tib. སྐྱབས་མགོན་ཕྱག་མཛོད] and some other good people. I went to deliver letters 2-3 times to them. After that, we also moved to E saying that it was too far away to stay in Lhüntse. In E, our late Kungö had a daughter whose mother was the wife of the chandzö of Lhagyari called Gombo Khangsar [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཁང་གསར]. So we stayed in their house. Khenjung Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག] said that he was going to his own estate. We stayed permanently in E. At that time, some people were saying the Abbot of Sera liked the Chinese. I am not sure whether it was true or not. Anyway, he went back [to Lhasa]. Gyarong Khembo was just staying around there and later he went to India. The monk from Ganden was sick and I heard that he was staying in the Chongye Riu Dechen Monastery. After that we didn't meet him. When we were staying in Lhüntse, the representatives were staying together, but when we moved to E, we got kind of scattered. When Samjola went to his estate, I went to see him off. After that, they [Chushigandru] were saying that we shouldn't remain like this and we should make a connection with Andru Jinda. At that time, he was in the Kham area. They talked about sending 20 some cavalry with a letter to make the connection with Jinda [and bring him back]. Finally, they sent them. I heard that there was a small Chinese regiment in Kongpo Gyalchen located above Kongpo Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ]. At that time, they didn't remain still [adhere to their original plan] and [instead] they said that we should surround and attack the Chinese regiment and rob their weapons. They stayed overnight and then the next morning they talked about entering the regiment when the Chinese cook would go to fetch water and planned to attack them in the early morning when the Chinese were asleep. [laughs] So when the cook went to fetch water, they rushed into the regiment one after another. At that time, the Chinese kept fierce dogs so the dogs barked and all of the Chinese were frightened. They had tunnels and bunkers in the regiment so when the Khambas entered the regiment, except for two people, all of the other 20 some odd people were killed in there. One of them was wounded and got out and the other was near the door, but he didn't go in.   

**Q:**  Were they able to send a message [to Gombo Tashi]?   

**A:**  They didn't get the chance to send a message. After that, Tsetra Lobsang [Tib. ཚེ་བཀྲ་བློ་བཟང] said that he is going and he went with 20 some riders. He went there and made the connection and came back. After that, we heard that the fighting took place in Lhasa. Kungö in response said that it is finished now, and he told me that probably we have to go to Norbulinga and we discussed about that. At that time, there was a lay official called Dodrong Rabgye [Tib. རྡོ་གྲོང་རབ་རྒྱས་ལགས] who was the husband of my wife's sister. He was with us at that time. So Kungö sent him back to [Lhasa] to make a report, but he was unable to come back to Lhoka and he was just hanging around in Norbulinga where he was arrested and sent to Gansu prison where many people died from starvation. After that, we received an order in E at about 6 p.m. saying the Dalai Lama is coming and our Kungö should come right away. Actually, we couldn't leave right away but we collected our things and we departed from E at dawn the next morning and after awhile, we didn't know where we were approaching because we were not familiar with that place. After awhile, we arrived at the place where there was an estate that belonged to the Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] family at around 12 p.m. We had some tea there and left at around 2 a.m. and then arrived at the Namseling Estate. Our Kungö was planning to go to Jedeshöl to receive the Dalai Lama. When we arrived at the estate called Chö [Tib. ཆོས] that belonged to Trekhang, we met Trekhang Khenjung. At that time, our Kungö received an order saying, "Do not come. The Dalai Lama is going via the upper part of Jedeshöl and then after passing a mountain pass, he is going to Chongye Riu Dechen Monastery." So we returned back and arrived at Chongye Riu Dechen. When we were going near a mountain range above Chongye Riu Dechen, we saw the Dalai Lama was coming. Kungö then told us, "You guys stay here. You shouldn't come with me." He left us near that mountain range and he went alone carrying a khata scarf. we went back to the lodging in Chongye village. After that, the Kashag I think have held a meeting.  

**Q:**  Was that in Chongye Riu Dechen?  

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Dalai Lama stay for a short time in Lhüntse?   

**A:**  They talked in Chongye Riu Dechen and I heard from Kungö that the Dalai Lama was going to stay there for two days. Then he told me, "We can't bear the danger. I am going to report to the Dalai Lama to leave tomorrow." So the Dalai Lama stayed only one day and night. In the morning, our Kungö went to see the Dalai Lama. I was standing there for the night. After awhile, there were 5-6 kungös there. They left in groups of 2-3 people one after another. Then the Dalai Lama was coming wearing a yellowish woolen cap made in Ladakh, a brown chupa and long red leather boots. At that moment I was standing there and the Dalai Lama was looking at me and he was about to talk to me. So I was afraid and I also felt sad and I couldn't look at him. So I just bent my head down. After awhile, the Dalai Lama was looking back at me. The Dalai Lama was going alone and then 2-3 of them followed him. I heard that a meeting was held that evening and Andru was appointed as the Dzasa Commander-in-Chief [Tib. ཛ་སག་དམག་སྤྱི] and Kundeling Kungö and Amdo Lekshey [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་ལེགས་བཤད] were told to stay behind as the colleagues of our Kungö. They were told to work in the temporary government [that had been set up in Lhüntse. After that, the Dalai Lama and all the other aristocrats also left. Then Kungö told me, "I was appointed like this, so we have to go to Jedeshöl." So we went to Jedeshöl directly. At that time, we didn't know what was happening in Lhasa. Some people were saying that they could hear the sounds of the cannons. We stayed in Jedeshöl for three days. Then it was said that we didn't dare to stay there and they were talking about crossing the ferry site in Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] and blocking the road the Chinese] in the Samye area. Then we also heard that the People's Liberation Army had reached Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] and Lhasa was completely lost. Therefore, we left that place at night and traveled the whole night and we reached the Namseling Estate where we stayed for two days. After that, we reached Tsetang and stayed in the Trandru [Tib. ཁྲ་འབྲུག] Temple for 3-4 days. On the other side, there was the Chinese regiment and they were shooting guns and flares. After that, they received a kind of phone call from Lhasa saying that it won't work out if they stay there. Because one of the regiments of Chushigandru was in Yarlung Phodrang [Tib. ཡར་ལུང་ཕོ་བྲང] we moved up there. I heard it was an estate that belonged to Mengyiling. We stayed there for 3-4 days. One morning, the steward of the regiment ran over to us and said, "The Chinese have already reached down there." At that time, the situation was very tense and everyday there were several thousands of people running away from Lhasa. When they told the Tibetan soldiers to stay there, they said please let us go and they just left their guns over there and went. Our Kungö knew some of the soldiers who were running away. At that time, Trekhang Khenjung was making a list of the soldiers in his office and the situation was kind of chaotic [Tib. ཟིང་རྒྱག]. When we heard that the Chinese soldiers had arrived down there, we saddled our horses in a hurried manner and left that place. At that time, there were also planes flying over that place frequently. At that time, probably, they had subdued Lhasa and they were coming after us. The planes were flying so low that I thought gunshots might also reach them so told them that I am going to shoot at the plane, but Kungö said, "Don't shoot. It is not good to shoot at them." At that time, Kungö said that there is a temple where the oracle was going into trance with the protective deity Shungden [Tib. ཤུགས་ལྡན] and also there was a Lama called Phari Trülku [Tib. ཕ་རི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ]. All of us went to the monastery to ask the oracle to go into trance and ask the deity to give a prophecy. But people were kind of stunned because the deity also didn't have much of a prophecy to give.   

**Q:**  Did they ask the deity for a prophecy?   

**A:**  Yes, probably they asked whether we could win in this place.   

**Q:**  What did the deity say?   

**A:**  He didn't have anything to say. He was just yelling. Then we ran away, moving day and night and crossing the Yartö Dragla [Tib. ཡར་སྟོད་བྲག་ལ] mountain pass. We traveled the whole night. I felt very sleepy and I wished they would take a rest and I thought I don't care even if I would die. But they didn't let me sleep at all. Then after we came to a nomad's place, we stopped for a meal and I got some tea to drink. Otherwise, we hadn't gotten any tea and food. After that, we went to Lhüntse. At that time, Lhasa was lost and all the people were running away to Tsöna. At this time. Andru Jinda was still in Kham. At that time, some people told Kungö that he should leave, but he refused to leave, saying that he wants wait to meet Andru. So we stayed in Lhüntse for quite a long time. During that time, some people delivered letters to Kungö. I didn't know what kind of secrets were in them, but they told Kungö that the Chinese had reached such and such places. After that, Kungö received a letter from Andru when we were at the Namseling Estate that said that he has arrived at Kongpo Giamda. At that time, Kungö said that now he doesn't have any choice but to wait for Andru. It was written in Andru's letter that he had crossed the ferry site and is coming through Rong. After that, Andru was able to arrive at Lhüntse and the two of them met and talked about what would be better to do. They stayed two days in Lhüntse after Jinda arrived. One day, they held a meeting and probably they told Kungö to go ahead to India. At that time, Yangjenla [Tib. གཡང་ཅན་ལགས], the relative of the mother, Ama la was also in Lhüntse. At that time, we heard that a letter was delivered to Kungö saying that Tsöna had been lost. We were saying that it might not be true, but if it was that was too bad. Then Jinda told Kungö to go ahead to India and tell the Indian Government that if we couldn't hold the place [Lhüntse], we are coming to Tawang, so please lend us a place to stay there. That night Kungö left for India and I was left with the horses and mules. I was told to come with the chief of the stables [Tib. ཆིབས་དཔོན] the next morning. If I didn't go with him, there was the danger that the horses and mules would get robbed. That night, at about 8 p.m., we received a letter saying that the Chinese had already arrived in Simphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད]. We were not sure whether it was just a rumor or not. Then Yangjenla and her husband read the letter and told me, "The Chinese soldiers had arrived at Simphü, so they will confront Kungö so please go quickly right now and tell Kungö not to come up [that way]. Tell him to cross the mountain and go to another place where there was a place for a detour. Otherwise, since Tsöna was lost, it would not be good at all. I left right away with a guide, but they [Kungö] had been riding very quickly so even though we went the whole night, we couldn't catch up with them. On the next morning at sunrise, we could see them riding ahead in the distance. After awhile, we arrived at the Jora [Tib. སྦོར་ར] Estate that belonged to the Yabshi Family and we saw that Kungö had stopped for a meal in that place. When I delivered the message, he said, "This is nonsense." [Tib. གང་ཡིན་འདི་ཡིན]. Then we reached a place between Tsöna and an estate that belonged to Drongön Rimpoche [Tib. འགྲོ་མགོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. On that day, at around 4-5 p.m., the sky became cloudy and windy with dust being blown everywhere. After awhile, there was a heavy snowfall for two days, so the road got blocked and we had to stay there. At that time, Drongön Rimpoche was there preparing to leave. Rimpoche said that he is going to a place in Tawang where one of his sponsors lived. He used to go there during the summer and he said that it was a very good place. We were planning to go to Tsöna. That place was very cold and the snow was still falling and it reached up to our knees. I heard that people would get frozen while they were standing on the road. Then Kungö told me to go to look and see whether Tsöna is really lost or not. It was a long way from there, probably I couldn't get there even if I traveled for the whole day, but I couldn't say no, so I just said, "Yes." But actually, the road was blocked with snow. He sent a guide with me and the two of us left. When we went up through the upper part of the valley towards the mountain pass, we met a household head so I asked him where he came from. He said that he came from Tsöna. When I asked him about the situation in Tsöna and whether the Chinese had arrived or not, he said the Chinese had arrived there and he asked where am I from. I told him that I am going to Tsöna to look at the situation. He said, "There is no use for you to go there because the Chinese have taken Tsöna and probably, they were firings cannons at the monastery." We could hear the sound of the cannons." Then we said this worked out well as we got the information needed so nor let's go back. We got back to where Kungö was and we made that person to stay over night and let him tell Kungö about the situation in Tsöna. Then Drongön Rimpoche said, "Let's go together and cross the Margo La Pass." This was a famous mountain pass and we had to pack down the snow on the road as this would be the first time it was used after it had been blocked by heavy snowfall.   

**Q:**  Was that when you packed the road by sending yaks ahead?  

**A:**  Yes. We had to cross three mountain passes, and the third mountain pass was the one that we couldn't cross. Those Lamas should have brought a guide from the beginning to clear the path on the mountain pass, but they didn't. When we had already arrived there, the lamas said that they don't know where the road is because it was covered with snow. Then I was told to go to call people to pack down a path through the snow. So I had to go back to the place where we stayed overnight and go to call people with the steward. We got 3-4 people and we came up. After awhile, it became dark. At that time, those people told me, "Please, do not take us with you and let us go back because we also have to get prepared [to flee]." Everyone is in a chaotic situation, so we can't stay here. We also need a road [to flee]." So those people were not going ahead. Therefore, I just told a lie and said, "If you are not going, I am going to shoot you." And I loaded my rifle. Then they didn't have any choice but to come with me. After that, it was dark and snowing and there was also a hailstorm, so it was out of the question to bring those people with me because if they ran away my life would be in danger. The steward also left, finding his own way out so I was alone. Then I got to the first mountain pass. At that time, it was at dawn and then the day broke and the sun shone on the top of the mountain pass. I felt cold and thirsty and hungry. Then I rode my horse and went through the waist of the mountain. After awhile, the snow reached the stomach of the horse and I slid down along with the horse and I didn't have any idea where we were sliding down to. Just after that, I heard a sound "kag" and the horse stopped against something with it's four legs. Thank God! The horse might have seen the cliff for when I looked down it was a cliff several thousands of stories high. If we had slid a single step more, then we would have fallen down. Then I was thinking how should I dismount the horse. I pulled my left leg from the stirrup and I could barely put my left leg on the ground and then I pulled out my right leg. Like this my life was saved. After that, fortunately, there were some kind of bushes growing around there and I cleaned the snow around there and made space for the horse to stand up and then I pulled up the horse's head so he could get out of that place. After that, when we got to the second mountain pass, I saw that the people were bringing back all the horses and the mules because they couldn't pass the third mountain pass. I couldn't catch up with them.  

