# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0058.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 23 January 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 67  
**Date of Birth:** 1927  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ] was a Litangba who was sent as the bodyguard/servant/sidekick of Tsipön Namseling by Andrutsang Gombo Tashi. In this interview, he talks about his experiences with Namseling in Lhoka and about Namseling's work with Chushigandru, and then their flight to India.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0058_03/H_0058_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time you said that on the 1st Tibet month, 3rd day, you all went to "demonstrate" [Tib. ངོགö] from Andru's house. About 500-700 riders went. What was the reason for doing this?   

**A:**  The reason was that in Litang the war had started. It was as I related last time. The traders from Baligyesum [Batang, Litang/Chantreng, and Gyeltang] said that the situation is not good and they gathered. So on the day of invocation of the deity at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> which was the 3rd, this day was chosen to "demonstrate."   

**Q:**  So when you got there you had a meeting?   

**A:**  No meeting. We went there, and as was customary, we burned incense and did the ritual (for the gods) [Tib. ལྷ་གྱེ [ལྷ་རྒྱལ]]. We fired many shots [into the air]. I don't know whether the Chinese were just overlooking this, but they did not even watch us.   

**Q:**  So the reason to go there was that the Chinese were not doing things well in Kham, so you wanted to show them. Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes. That's it.   

**Q:**  Then you said that after you returned to Lhasa [from this], one Litangba came as an interpreter of the Chinese and said that it's not good what you all did. This was told to you by Kungö?   

**A:**  No. Andru was saying this. This was something everyone knew.   

**Q:**  Then you said that later on, traders went to Siling and there their goods were taken but money not paid and they became bankrupt. What was this all about? What happened?   

**A:**  What happened was that when the Chinese first came they paid exorbitant prices. They paid 100 where they should have paid 10. So all the traders went there. Then they reduced the prices suddenly and then they said that they have to pay a tax. And so it seemed that they got bankrupt. So this is what Andru said.   

**Q:**  So this was one reason?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then you mentioned a few names. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jampala or something. Who sponsored the Kalachakra?   

**A:**  It was sponsored by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jimpa.   

**Q:**  [You mentioned that] There were Chinese military camps in Nortölinga, Sera, Trib, Drepung, and Gyangdralinga. You said that there were red and blue lights and a lot of gun fire. So were they firing in their camps?   

**A:**  Yes, it seemed that they were practicing.   

**Q:**  Was it for all to hear?   

**A:**  Oh, there was so much noise. One thought that at any moment somebody might shoot. The situation at that time was such that there was immediate danger of confrontation.   

**Q:**  It was soon after that Gyadotsang Thöndrub and Andru Jinda told you that you have to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s place, right?   

**A:**  I went there just before that. 2-3 weeks after returning to Lhasa. I was told to go to Andru's house.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for you to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s place?   

**A:**  As a bodyguard/servant/side-kick. We Khambas say Andru. To watch over him. They said that I must go because I had stayed in Lhasa for a long time and since I was a neighbor. They insisted that I go.   

**Q:**  It's not clear but you said something about if you were caught then there was something to do with some Khamtsen people.   

**A:**  No. It was not Khamtsen. I said if I went and was caught or killed, don't let me be arrested. They said that if the two of you are arrested [he and Namseling] then we will make sure that you are released or we will die in the attempt. They swore before the gods and they made me pledge that I would do my utmost.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa a lot of Chinese were suddenly arrested and sent down. Then it was said that those who came from Kham side would also be sent down, right?   

**A:**  We had started an organization right? We would not have surrendered [if the Chinese tried to do that] and so it was going to be war. It had already been a year since preparations were made. We had received teaching, offered the golden throne, made preparations at Lhasa. Horses were paid for at prices as high a 200-800 dotse. Likewise arms were bought. A year had passed and I don't know if they just overlooked us, but the Chinese did not do anything [about us]. Around this time many Chinese who were just hanging around were arrested. We did not know it, but later <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> received a secret message that we were going to be sent down [next]. So we all left for Drigutang.   

**Q:**  You said that mainly Gyadotsang Thöndrub and Andru Jinda used to come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s house. Who else came?   

**A:**  When I was there, it was those two.   

**Q:**  Phala at times came, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I can only suspect that His Holiness knew about it, but Phala used to come. Then also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Gyagpön Kedramla. He used to come to Andrutsang all the time. He [Namseling] also had connections with Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje. I went once or twice with letters. They [Jagö Namgyal Dorje] had a steward [Tib. ཉེརཔ] who I met. At Lhasa they had a lot of connections. In Lhoka, he had his base in Dakpo someplace and did not come to the main base at E.   

**Q:**  Let me point out certain places. After the meeting at Lhasa [meeting to subdue Khambas] you all left from Lhasa to Kundeling. So you were first at Lhasa and then when it was said that you have to go to Lhoka to discuss this because the Chinese said that, so from Lhasa you went to Kundeling.   

**A:**  Yes, our animals and the servants of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] An important aristocratic family that commonly provided monk officials.">Tregang</a> and the monastic representatives went over the bridge. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, Tregang Khenjung and myself went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>'s guest house. Kundeling was there and so we stayed there for an hour or so. Kundeling is located on this side of the river, near Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  So from there you crossed the river to Ramagang.   

**A:**  Yes, and we stayed there for 1 day.   

**Q:**  From there we went to Jedeshöl [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ], and then to Chongye Riu Dechen and then towards <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then you went towards the Tawang side where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had their base in a pastureland area.   

**A:**  At Chongye, the day we were leaving, we met some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> riders.   

**Q:**  Yes, the ones who were going to Tsetang with Jama Jinda and   

**A:**  Alo Dawa.   

**Q:**  The main base that was near Tawang was then moved to E, right? So Kungö was at Lhüntse, right? Later he moved to Lhagyari.   

**A:**  Yes. [On all counts]. At Lhagyari he had a daughter in the Gombo Khangsar family so he stayed there.   

**Q:** At this place it was said that His Holiness is coming, so he left again, right? He went to Chongye Riu Dechen.   

**A:**  Yes. We went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] An important aristocratic family that commonly provided monk officials.">Tregang</a>'s estate. Then it was said that His Holiness was not coming via Jedeshöl, but via the upper reaches of the valley to Chongye Riu Dechen. So there was such a letter.   

**Q:**  Yes, I got all that. Then to Lhüntse right? And then back to Jedeshöl again, right?   

**A:**  At Chongye Riu Dechen [they had] an audience. Kungö and Andru were appointed and their assistants were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey. So at Lhüntse, a new government was begun.   

**Q:**  From Chongye Riu Dechen, Kungö did not go to Lhüntse, right?   

**A:**  No. After His Holiness left, we went to Jedeshöl and stayed there for about 3-4 days. I think Kungö was concerned about the Chinese coming, so for that reason he stayed. At Chongye Riu Dechen, there was Pachain of Targye Gomba who <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> had sent to check out the route since His Holiness was coming. Pachain later severed his own head when it was said that his weapons have to be handed in. So I forgot to mention that last time.   

**Q:**  From Jedeshöl then he went to Tsetang and Trandrug, right.   

**A:**  At Jedeshöl, Lhasa was already lost. Then it was said that the Chinese were coming from the Gongkar area and so it's not good idea to hang around. The servants said that. So we withdrew. At Jedeshöl there were the fighters of Lingtsang Gyebo who were defending the area. They were telling us something [about us leaving] and so we said who we were. Then they left us alone. Otherwise they were making it difficult for those who were running away.   

**Q:**  So from Tsetang you all went to Yarlung Phodrang.   

**A:**  We went to Trandrug, then Yarlung Phodrang.   

**Q:**  Then finally to Lhüntse again to see Andru.   

**A:**  Yes. When it was said that Andru was coming, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> Phogang was at Yarlung Phodrang. Kungö stayed near that. Then he stayed at Lhüntse. Beside Samjola, most probably there wasn't anybody else around. All had no hope and had left. When more prominent persons came, Kungö asked them to please stay. They would say that they will leave their guns, but they have to leave.   

**Q:**  The main <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> base moved to Lhagyari. Then Kungö left from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> and stayed at Lhüntse for over a month, right?   

**A:**  At first he was at Tsöna. Then Nyenang , then at E and finally.   

**Q:**  Didn't he stay at Lhüntse?   

**A:**  Yes, twice. At first from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> to Lhüntse, then he went to E. Then finally after we lost ground [post-uprising], he was at Lhüntse again waiting for Andru.   

**Q:**  When he first went to Lhüntse what was the reason?   

**A:**  When they moved their base, we had to keep contact. If he stayed very close, then there would be danger right? So we stayed at Lhüntse and there were bases all over of 50-100 persons. While at Lhüntse it was felt that it was too far from [the main base]. I went from Lhüntse a few times. The reason was that there were secret communications with Tsetang. I went there regarding the new <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet.">Horji</a> [must mean the Lhoji].   

**Q:**  The reason I am asking this question is that all were working together, for example recruiting volunteers and so I wondered why each was staying separately. The base was in Lhagyari, but Kungö was in Lhüntse.   

**A:**  Yes. He said that it was too far also. It took two days continuous [travelling] to get there.   

**Q:**  Why couldn't they stay together?   

**A:**  They could, but Kungö only did secret connections and was not staying at the base.   

**Q:**  When Andru Jinda was not there, the main persons were Chandzö Dorzinla, Kyamgön Chandzö and Jangtsa Chöndze, right?   

**A:**  There were many there, I can't name them all.   

**Q:**  So there were many groups right? Twenty-thirty or so.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So each was leading their own group. For example if it was Lingtsa, then the Lingtsang King led them.   

**A:**  Yes. The Lingtsang King was not there, but somebody from Lingtsang was. Then from Chandring, there was Kesang Chöndze. One of the persons I had connections with passed away last year. He was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, a Chandringpa by the name of Ngawang. He was well read and I gave letters to him and to Jonda [Changtsa] Chöndze. Then there were many.   

**Q:**  Each group had a leader (pön) and there were so many, and so among themselves there were people who led.   

**A:**  There were none.   

**Q:**  So if there were so many leaders, wasn't that a problem ?   

**A:**  Yes, it's said like that. . Mainly the main base was at E Lhagyari. Then there were some commanders (magji) of Litang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and so a lot of people were poking fun. They were not pöns [chiefs], but wealthier traders and families. So they led and had 60-70 soldiers and guarded certain areas. There were no definite plans as to we are going to fight here and then go there. One never knew where the Chinese would come from. So it was guerrilla warfare attacking and retreating and going wherever one had to.   

**Q:**  The main battle was at Tsetang?   

**A:**  It was not that big a battle, and it was well fortified. They say that they were very well dug in. There must have been only about 200-300 soldiers. This was their main military base. Besides Tsetang, the Chinese did not have any base in Lhoka. At first Jama Jinda and the others attacked it. If they had gone all out they may have won. But they fought for a while and then withdrew. Then they attacked after 5-6 days and so on. So the Chinese got clever. If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> is here, then they made paths up the hill. They hoisted their flags and dug in. The fighting went on back and forth. However, we were really able to stop them. Since the time we came to Lhoka until after the uprising, the Chinese were kept in check there.   

**Q:**  They were not able to come out?   

**A:**  No. After the uprising then there was nothing to do. About 500-600 Chinese came there quite a few times and they were all stopped.   

**Q:**  Were there Chinese in other places in the Lhoka area?   

**Q:**  None.   

**Q:**  So only Tsetang? Otherwise they were not able to come?   

**A:**  Yes, only Tsetang. This was there when they came much earlier. They did come intermittently at Rong. Then at Jedeshöl and this side. There were so many soldiers when we first came to Lhoka that one got discouraged. When we left Lhasa and passed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>, the whole hill was filled with trucks; thousands.   

**Q:**  So from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was at Lhüntse and then went to E, right? And from about that time whether we speak of Samjola or the monastic representatives, everyone sort of got separated, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They went to E and then there was only Kungö Khenjung.   

**Q:**  So then the others sort of had no work?   

**A:**  The others sort of had nothing to do. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> had to be there and Samjola was with him. The others did not have anything to do but just sit around. The one who returned was the Sera Ngagpa Khembo. The Ganden Gusho was sick and was staying around Chongye. The Gyarong Khembo went to India.   

**Q:**  Tseda Losang, the one who was sent to contact Andru; where was he from?   

**A:** He's a Litangba.   

**Q:**  You mentioned Dodrung Rabgyela? Was he <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s daughter's husband?   

**A:**  Yes. He was like a servant and when the uprising began he was sent to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Why was he sent to Lhasa?   

**A:**  It was something secret, I don't know. He may have been sent to see Phala. Anyway he was sent to Norbulinga. I don't know the reason.   

**Q:**  Andru was a Magji at Lhüntse and what was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>?   

**A:**  What should I say? He was the main one.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey were Leja?   

**A:**  It's said that they were assistants, like Leja.   

**Q:**  So later the two did not stay and left? With His Holiness?   

**A:**  Yes. We did not know where they went and there was just no time to do anything.   

**Q:**  Yes. Around that time everything sounds the same. For example if an organization was agreed upon, it somehow never worked. For example the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers went to India and then returned. They said that they were going to fight and gathered, but could not. There were so many instances of organizing, but nothing working out, right? What was really happening? Was ground being lost too soon and everyone was fleeing? For example, it was agreed that they were going to stay at Lhüntse and work. So after agreeing, the work was not done and they left? What was happening? Was it an emergency? There was no discipline and each one was thinking about their own personal welfare.   

**A:**  Each one looked out for himself. The ones who came from Lhasa were totally broken in spirit and nothing whatsoever could be done with them. Some kungös came to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and they were so shocked that they couldn't talk much. Likewise, everyone was thinking that there is no way to hang around. Many told Kungö [Namseling] that there is no hope and it's better that you leave. Kungö said no way. Actually we were the really the tail end. Kungö hoped that if he stayed and Andru came up, there might be some way to gather a force again. At Lhüntse Ditru Labrang and the two {Andru and Namseling] stayed for an hour or so and finally Andru asked Kungö to leave for India to do to temporarily borrow land in India we could use up to Tawang and then they will try their best to stop the advance. So that's the reason why we left ahead. When we were [leaving] Yarlung Phodrang [for] Lhüntse, the planes were so close that it looked only a stones throw away. It seems that they may be looking for His Holiness, since he already had left. They flew so low that I thought of shooting at them, but Kungö said not to.   

**Q:**  After crossing the Magola Pass, what was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> supposed to do? After he reached Indian soil, what happened? Where did he stay and what did he do and think?   

**A:**  We were supposed to borrow land to use [as a new base] and then to return after a month or so. As I told you last time, there was a tremendous amount of snow on Magola and I almost fell over the precipice. Later, since the animals could not go over the main pass, they were returning. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> said that for the time being the animals could be kept at E where his daughter was. After the snow melts during the summer, they could cross. As I got to the snow pass I could not find persons to shovel the snow. There was an elderly person who slowly got to the middle of the pass. None of the items to be taken to India were transported. Only some bags where meat and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> were put for emergency were to be taken. We actually did not have many things to take, only clothes and some food. All the items were piled up. The same was true of the lamas' [items]. I had taken for granted that the items would be lost. Namseling had two leather bags and I took out the better clothes and I took a bag on my back and took enough to eat. As I got to the top of the pass I caught up with him. Then it got dark and just after the pass we slept that night on a grassy area. We did not even have a hot cup of tea. All utensils were left behind. Then every hour more and more people were coming [fleeing]. Then the animals came empty. All the food was taken. Clothes too. The one who herded the animals just brought some tsamba . So many people were fleeing that it was like a pot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> boiling. The Indian government was taking all the arms. Then Andru Jinda came and once again Namseling and he met. They spoke about what to do next. They said that they should do as planned previously. However, no one was now listening. They just left. So there was no hope of returning. So everyone was there like a beggar and even the animals. It is said that there were 4-5000 dead. It is definitely true. From the snow covered Magola Pass we descended down to the hot valley and then climbed up to the snows at the summit, then the hot valleys again. All together it took us 15 days. There were just streams of people and the path was not appropriate for animals. There were so many dead [animals]. They were so hungry that they ate each other's tails and manes until there was no hair left. They even ate the carpets. The mules died 5-6 at one time. The ones that fell off the path just went thundering down. Some were dead, others were about to die, some were giving birth, dead foals, alive foals besides dead mares. Just so many dead. That's how it was until we reached Tawang. One spot where we were descending was a river, smaller than the Lhasa Kyichu. When we got there Andru Jinda had left earlier. It's not a river one can cross. I don't know how they did it but long trees were cut and 2-3 were tied together. People crossed and almost drowned. Only the stronger animals could cross. Donkeys and weaker ones drowned. It was terrible.   

**Q:**  So after coming over [to India], then there wasn't any organization as such.   

**A:**  No, nothing. Later <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> formed the Lo Mustang organization. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> stayed at Kalimpong and was the Dönjö. There were government orders to begin the Dökar [Performance group] along with Nornang Kungö and others. It began first in Kalimpong.   

