#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0227.01 : Tape 1   
##  : with Gasitsang, Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང, ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** August 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Shelling  
**Name:** Gasitsang, Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང, ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 80  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས] was a monk from Litang Monastery who became part of the revolt against the Chinese in Litang. He is the younger brother of Litang Lotse, who was part of the first group of CIA trainees. In this interview, he discusses the organization of Litang Monastery, the first fighting in Litang in 1956 and he describes the war there. Later, he discuses fleeing to Lhasa and being taken by the CIA to Okinawa.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0227_01/H_0227_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What was the original cause of the Litang battle?   

**A:**  The Litang area is close to the Chinese border. It is a 12 day journey on horse back from Litang to Dartsedo. When the Chinese first came to Litang, they were clever in their policy and they said that they were going to help the poor people. At that time, they didn't make war. On the 26th in 1956, my older brother Lotse [Tib. བློ་ཚེ] and I went to sell Indian goods in Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག] in Kham. My older brother was called Jayan Wöse [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་འོད་ཟེར]. We stayed there for about 2-3 months, and while we were there we received a letter from Litang that said, "You two should not get too engrossed (Tib. གོཁོར [མགོ་འཁོར]) in trading. Here, the Chinese are not acting well. You should come back to the monastery as soon as possible." We had bartered most of the goods for barley, but we couldn't sell all the goods. In the Litang Monastery, there were 4 Dreljungwa [Tib. unknown] appointed under the Litang Kyamgön, the main Lama.   

**Q:**  What were the 4 Dreljungwa?   

**A:**  They were officials working under the Kyamgön, something like lay officials in the Dewashung. At that time, there were some quarrels among the 4 Dreljungwa and they fought internally and killed each other. When we arrived at the monastery, there were serious disturbances and trouble (Tib. སིངཇ་ཉོགཏྲ [ཟིང་ཆ་རྙོག་དྲ]) within the monastery.   

**Q:**  This disturbance happened inside the monastery, but it was not related to the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but the Chinese were nearby and they were watching what we were doing.   

**Q:**  What did they quarrel about?   

**A:**  Generally, these 4 Dreljungwa were very good people, but some people were always jealous of capable people. There was a person called Champa Kelsang [Tib. བྱམས་པ་སྐལ་བཟང], who was one of the Dreljungwa. He went for trading to Lhasa and came back. At that time, the reincarnation of the Litang Kyamgön [Rimpoche] had to be brought to Lhasa. So all the nomads and the farmers in Litang had to donate something. At that point, Dreljungwa Andzin Losal [Tib. ཨ་འཛིན་བློ་གསལ], who was related to Alo Dawa [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཟླ་བ], said that the 4 Dreljungwa should resign and new ones should be appointed. Actually, the chandzö of the Litang Kyamgön [Rimpoche] was behind this and they wanted to drive away Champa Kelsang. The other two Dreljungwa were named Gyatrug Tseden [Tib. རྒྱ་ཕྲུག་ཚེ་བརྟན] and Dzemo Dralu [Tib.?]. Dreljungwa Champa Kelsang said, "It is not easy for us to resign because we have to hand over [do an accounting] all the property that belongs to the Litang Kyamgön who had received that title from the dewashung, and these properties are spread out all over the mountains and the river banks. After handing over all the things that belong to Litang Kyamgön, only then can we resign." The reincarnation of Litang Kyamgön was born in the homeland of Radru Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]. The Lama was about 8 years old then. Then Champa Kelsang said, "If we have to resign, first I will go to my monk's apartment and then I will go to the chandzö and resign." When he went to the chandzö, he took a dagger with him and he planned to kill the people who were malicious (Tib. ནག་པོ [གནག་པོ]) towards him. Then the 4 Dreljungwa went to resign. Champa Kelsang then stabbed Andzin Losal. One of the assistant of Dreljungwa called Keldram Lutön [Tib.?] held on to [Tib. ཐམ་འཐམས] Champa Kelsang thinking that he would kill many people. But Kelsang also killed Keldram Lutön and then he saw that Andzin Losal was running away inside, so he also stabbed and killed Dremo Dralu, and then he killed Andzin Losal inside the temple. After killing three people, Champa Kelsang went to his monk's apartment. Then all of the 8 Khamtsen in Litang Monastery and the chabu gathered together and held a meeting.   

**Q:**  What were the names of the 8 Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Shiwa [Tib. ཞི་བ] Khamtsen was the main Khamtsen. It had the same amount of monks as all the other Khamtsen together. Most of the monks were from the nomadic areas. The other seven Khamtsen were: Tsogsam [Tib. ཚོགས་བསམ], Mala [Tib. མ་ལ], Gawa [Tib. དགའ་བ], Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང], Napo [Tib. སྣ་པོ], Rawa [Tib. དབྲ་བ] and Shungpa [Tib. གཞུང་པ]. All of the monks of the 8 Khamtsen gathered together and surrounded Champa Kelsang and tried to seize him. After that, there was a monk called Shari Atrin [Tib. ཤར་རི་ཨ་འཕྲིན] who used to wear good robes. He just went to watch Kelsang and he was hiding himself and watching what Kelsang was doing. However, Kelsang thought that he was the chabu and shot him dead.   

**Q:**  What was the reason why they wanted to drive out Kelsang? Was it because of their internal quarrel or was it related to relations with the Chinese?   

**A:**  There weren't any relations with the Chinese. Actually, Kelsang was kind of an honest person. But they had some internal quarrels. When we arrived at the monastery, Kelsang was sitting there holding guns. He was just waving his hands to us like saying good buy (Tib. ཆཔེ [ཕྱག་ཕེབས]).   

**Q:**  He had already killed those people, but they couldn't arrest him, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he also shot another person called Khodo Lobsang in his knee and he still didn't surrender. So the high Lamas of the monastery threw letters to him through the veranda telling him to go outside the monastery. "We will guarantee that there will be no damage to the things and furniture in your shag." Later, I heard that he and his servant left the monastery. Then the monastery took all of his things. Before that, the Chinese were coming to the monastery. There was a Chinese Regimental Commander [Ch. tuan zhang] nicknamed Lagsha [Tib. ལག་ཤ] who had webbed fingers. He was a tall guy with a face that looked like he had leprosy. He was a frightening person. I heard that he had volunteered to liberate Litang.   

**Q:**  He was also nicknamed, "a man with bird's claw," Chalagjan [Tib. བྱ་ལག་ཅན], right?   

**A:**  Yes, I saw him coming to the monastery with about 10 soldiers to watch the religious dance on the 29th of the 12th Tibetan month. Usually, the monks had guns but we were not allowed carry guns on our backs when we entered the monastery. But the Chinese were coming into the monastery carrying guns.   

**Q:**  Where did Kelsang go after he left the monastery? Did he go to the Chinese?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. He was also against the Chinese. After that, the Chinese delivered a message saying that the monks should come to a meeting. At that time, the highest monastic officials of the Litang Monastery were the chandzö or chabu, and the drönyer.   

**Q:**  Do you know the names of the chabu?   

**A:**  Among the chabu, there was Deyong Atrin, [Tib. དེད་འོང་ཨ་འཕྲིན]. There were 4 chabu.   

**Q:**  The 4 chabu were the main people in charge of the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes, drönyer was also one of the main ones in charge.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the drönyer?   

**A:**  Probably, he was called Dzigong Thubden, [Tib. རྫི་གོང་ཐུབ་བསྟན].   

**Q:**  Who was higher in authority, the chabu or the drönyer?   

**A:**  They were the same. The chabu together with monks from the 8 khamtsen, altogether 25 monks, went to attend the Chinese meeting which was held in the Chinese administrative house located at a distance of about 2 miles from the monastery. The Chinese had planned to arrest them if they didn't accept their plan.   

**Q:**  Did all the chabu attend the meeting?   

**A:**  There were 1-2 chabu who attended and there were representatives from the 8 khamtsen.   

**Q:**  There weren't any misers at the meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese soldiers were holding sten-guns [Tib. ཏིངེན] and surrounded the house where the meeting was held. The Chinese said at the meeting, "Today, at this meeting, we have two things to tell you. There is a white path and a black path. If you go on the white path, it is the path of peaceful liberation and the black one is the path of liberation by military force. You should decide right now whether you are going on the white or the black path."   

**Q:**  Was this in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes, it was before the fighting took place. At that point, one of the representatives said, "We can't make that decision right now. All the people in the monastery and the farmers should hold a meeting and discuss this matter. Just a few people can't make such a decision." The Chinese said, "That is not alright. You must make the decision right now at this meeting." The representatives then told the Chinese, "We have to discuss this with the households living around the monastery, please delay (Tib. thüngyang [དུས་འགྱངས]) and give us some time. We the people here attending the meeting can't make the decision." The Chinese said "This is also not alright. You must make the decision right now. It is not alright to delay." Some of the monks had daggers and some of them had pistols in their robe's pouches. At that point, Seru Champa, who was a monk from our Tsogsam Khamtsen, took out his pistol and pointed it at the forehead of the Chinese leader and said, "If you don't let us delay giving the answer, you can just kill us if you want to. We will not accept what you said. Why aren't we allowed to delay giving an answer so we can discuss this with the monastery and the peasants? If you give us this kind of aggressive (Tib. ཀཙེམཔོ [བཀའ་བཙན་པོ]) order, we can't accept it. You can just kill all of the 25 representatives right now." And he pointed the pistol at the chest or the cheek of the Chinese officer. And some of the others took out daggers and showed the daggers to some [of the] Chinese officers. Then some representatives said, "Don't act like this." At that time, the Chinese didn't dare to arrest them and they were able to leave that place and return to the monastery.   

**Q:**  They didn't accept what the Chinese said, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then they held meetings in the monastery and told the monks what the Chinese had told them about the peaceful and military liberation at the meeting. If they went on the path of peaceful liberation, they would have to hand over all their weapons.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese tell them at the meeting that "If you go on the path of peaceful liberation, you have to hand over your weapons"?   

**A:**  Yes, they said that "You should hand over the weapons. The people don't need weapons because we will protect the peasants." They also said that all the plains should be cultivated and the monks must work. This was the white path. The black path was the military solution [Tib. དྲག་པོ]. They meant that if they didn't accept it, they would make war. Then all the monks in the monastery and the farmers held a meeting in the monastery for days and nights.   

**Q:**  Did many farmers attend the meeting?   

**A:**  No, only the leaders of the farmers and nomads attended the meeting. Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན] was the head of a thousand nomad households. He was about 24 years old. The Chinese had given him a title and a big name. The Chinese called him to meetings, but he refused, even though he was paid a high salary.   

**Q:**  Was he appointed as the Vice Chairman [Ch. zhuxi, Tib. གཞོན་པོ]?   

**A:**  Probably. I forgot to tell you something that happened at that Chinese meeting. There was a monk called Yama Thöndrup [Tib. ཡ་མ་དོན་གྲུབ] who was the representative of Shiwa Khamtsen. He said at the meeting, "In the beginning when you first came, it was written in the 17-Point Agreement that you came to help the people and that the people have religious freedom. But now you are saying that you want to liberate us. What you said before and what you say now does not match. So we will never accept that. Mao Zedong had said that 'Tibet is poor, so we are going to help the people and develop Tibet and people [will] have religious freedom.' But now why are you talking about the white and the black path? We can't accept it." At that moment, one of the Chinese officer said, "Yesterday, the sunshine was not good, but today the sunshine is good, right? So it is like that. The previous talks have passed over and are finished." When the meeting was held in the monastery, Yönrupön said at the meeting, "Now we have all the weapons in our hands. If we can't challenge the Chinese at this time, once the weapons are handed over, then it is their choice to do whatever they want to do. I am the head of a thousand nomads. I will never accept what the Chinese said. Even if only one person is left, I will challenge the Chinese. Once, we hand over the weapons, not only will they liberate our place, but they will also liberate the whole of Tibet." Our people liked to fight, so all the people decided to do that. So the nomads organized their regiments near the monastery. The farmers also set up their regiments [Tib. དམག་སྒར] near by.   

**Q:**  Did they pitch up tents for organizing the regiments?   

**A:**  Yes, they put up tents. This was decided by all the people in the monastery and the farmers. Inside the monastery, all of us were monks, so we built bunkers with stones for a couple of days on the mountain called Machen Pomra [Tib. རྨ་ཆེན་སྤོམ་ར], which was located at the back side of the monastery. We were supposed to fight with the Chinese if war broke out. The Chinese were also building bunkers by putting sand in gunny sacks in their buildings.   

**Q:**  At that time, how many monks were there in the monastery?   

**A:**  Usually, when the Mönlam Festival was held in the monastery, there were about 7,000 monks. In those early times, there used to be about 5,000 monks.   

**Q:**  It was bigger than Sera and Drepung, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were all of the 7,000 monks in the monastery?   

**A:**  Most of them were in the monastery.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers had they prepared in the regiments of the nomads and the farmers?   

**A:**  I heard that the farmers in Tsogsam and Mala had prepared about 300 soldiers.   

**Q:**  This is from two villages, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many villages were there in that area?   

**A:**  There was Uthog [Tib. དབུ་ཐོག], Gawa, and Shapa, and the biggest one was Yönru.   

**Q:**  Yönru was a nomad area, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were 1,000 households in Yönru.   

**Q:**  So, the nomad areas had more soldiers than the farmers, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There were other nomad area, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was Degongma [Tib. སྡེ་གོང་མ] and many other nomad areas.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me how many soldiers there were altogether from the nomads?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  Anyway, both the nomads and the farmers had prepared for war, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but that time, the war had not yet started.   

**Q:**  During that time, did the Chinese hold any other talks with the monastery?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. Both the Chinese and the monastery were just preparing for war because it was definite that war would break out. 50 Chinese went to inspect the place where the Yönru regiment was located to look at what they were doing. After that, the Chinese ambushed Yönru's soldiers when they were coming down. At that point, they killed Yönrupön's servant and 2-3 other people.   

**Q:**  The Chinese first provoked the Yönru soldiers and then ambushed them when they going on the road, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many Yönru soldiers were there when they were ambushed.   

**A:**  I don't know how many soldiers there were at that time, but 28 Chinese soldiers were killed and they (Tibetans) took all of their weapons. The remaining Chinese soldiers fled.   

**Q:**  How many Yönru soldiers were killed?   

**A:**  The servant of Yönrupön and another soldier were killed, and 1-2 people were wounded. At about sunset on that day, I saw that Yönrupön and like 15-16 riders came to the monastery carrying the body of his servant.   

**Q:**  Yönrupön himself was there when they got ambushed, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that they held meetings in the monastery. Even after this ambush, the war didn't start for a couple of days. There was a better-off monk called Achog Chönjor [Tib. ཨ་ལྕོག་ཆོས་འབྱོར] in Tsogsam Khamtsen, and Khargya Ngawang Tengye [Tib. མཁར་རྒྱ་ངག་དབང་བསྟན་རྒྱས] who was from Yönru. These these two were the first chabu of the Litang Monastery. They had also been appointed as county head [Ch. xian zhang] by the Chinese. The monastery sent the two of them and two other people to Dartsedo to tell the Chinese that their soldiers were instigating a fight in Litang. So the Chinese must withdraw their troops from this place.   

**Q:**  Did all of those 4 people have the title of county head?   

**A:**  Yes, they all had titles. When they went to the main Chinese office in Dartsedo, they were held inside, and their guns were taken away and they didn't let them return. The Chinese held them like prisoners. When the Chinese heard that the war had broken out in Litang, they returned their weapons and sent them back to Litang to negotiate between the Chinese and the Tibetans.   

**Q:**  Did the war break out while they were in Dartsedo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the second war took place, did the Chinese start the fighting?   

**A:**  Yes, they attacked the Tibetans. It was snowing on the day that the war started in the early morning. We had to brush off the snow from the roofs of the monastery. In early morning, all of us brothers cleaned off the snow, and when we came back to our monk's apartment we ate tsamba and dry cheese with tea. On the previous day, the soldiers of Tsogsam and Mala had come inside the monastery because the weather was cold and it was snowing, so they couldn't stay out on the plain. On that day, I told them that the war will break out in the morning because the soldiers of Tsogsam and Mala had entered the monastery. In the morning, when we were drinking tea, when the sun rose, I heard gun shots. It was the Chinese who had started shooting.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese shoot at the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, they were shooting at the monastery where we had built bunkers in the monastery.   

**Q:**  They didn't fire cannons, right?   

**A:**  They fired cannons and machine guns called Jiguan [Ch. ji guan], which held 30 bullets in the magazine. I watered the horses and fed them fodder, and then I took off my monk's robe and put on my layman's chupa, and carried my gun and went outside. There was a Chinese payroll office down there which used be a place where the sores on the back of horses were treated. When I got near the marketplace, I saw that the Payroll Office [Tib. ཕོགས་ཁང] had been set on fire.   

**Q:**  Who set it on fire?   

**A:**  Our soldiers set it on fire. It was known that there were about 200-300 Chinese in that office. Probably, most of them died in the fire and some might have been shot. About 20-30 Chinese were hiding in the toilet. One of our monks called Thubden, who had recently came from Lhasa, saw the faces of the Chinese, which were burnt so their teeth were revealed. So he said the Chinese were smiling. When he was looking at the Chinese corpses, one of the Chinese who was in the toilet shot him dead. On that day, probably, 200-300 Chinese were killed.   

**Q:**  Were they burned and also shot dead?   

**A:**  Yes. On that day 5-6 of our soldiers were killed and 1-2 were wounded. We had built the bunkers with stones near the place where we burn incense. When the Chinese fired cannon shells onto the bunker, the shrapnel hit Shije Chödrug's stomach and he got wounded. I saw his blood on the snow. On that day, I also went to fight and shot my gun.   

**Q:**  Did you kill any Chinese?   

**A:**  We were all shooting together, so I didn't know clearly whether I had killed any Chinese or not.   

**Q:**  Did all the monks in the monastery become soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes, except for the small child monks and the elderly, all of them had become soldiers.   

**Q:**  All of them put on laymen's chupa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did all the monks have enough guns?   

**A:**  Yes, we had. Most of the monks had their own guns.   

**Q:**  Was this the first fight?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, the 20-30 Chinese who were hiding in the toilet came out. The soldiers of the monastery had surrounded them. When they came out, our soldiers shot them and killed several of them. But most of them were not hit. That was strange. Some of the Chinese died when they just got near their own bunker and most of them fled. About 10 Chinese went through the marketplace and were able to flee. But 8-9 Chinese who were running on the plain were killed.   

**Q:**  All of you were shooting together, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably, there were not many Chinese soldiers. Probably, there were a little more than 1,000 soldiers. The soldiers of the monastery surrounded the Chinese regiment and diverted the drinking water of the Chinese and caused them severe hardships. The Chinese were a little bit lucky. At that time, there was snowfall, so they ate snow. But later the Chinese had a hard time. When there were about 20-30 of our soldiers waiting near the stream, they saw that the Chinese were coming out at night to drink water on the grassy plain, like animals drinking water.   

**Q:**  The main fighting had already started, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How long did the first war last?   

**A:**  It took 26 days and nights.   

**Q:**  Did you fight continuously for 26 days and nights?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Your soldiers saw the Chinese drinking water on the grassy plain, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They shot the Chinese and they got guns and loads of ammunition from the Chinese. The Chinese were using the short Bura rifles. It was not the long Russian Bura rifle. There were about 1,000 Chinese and they had a hard time. I forgot to tell you something that happened before the war broke out. When the monastery decided to fight, we sent a letter to the dewashung requesting their support with arms. At that time we didn't need soldiers.   

**Q:**  Did you send a messenger?   

**A:**  Probably, they did. I don't remember clearly. Similarly, we also sent letters to Dargye Gomba, Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], Chantreng and Batang telling them that we should have solidarity/unity (Tib. ཇིགདྲིལ [གཅིག་སྒྲིལ]) in fighting with the Chinese. The Chinese are not doing good things, so if we don't make war against the Chinese, the Chinese are planning to eat up (Tib. ས [ཟ]) [take over] the whole of Tibet.   

**Q:**  While you were fighting in Litang, you sent the letters, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Pandatsang [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] supported us providing 10 trunks of ammunition and 2 Jiguan machine guns which held 30 bullets in the magazine that were stuck in from underneath. It was not like the bren-gun where the magazine is stuck in from the top. It was stuck from the bottom. I heard about that from other people. Otherwise, we didn't receive any answer from the Dewashung.   

**Q:**  You didn't get any answer from anywhere you had sent letters, right?   

**A:**  Probably, they had received some answers. However, they didn't receive any answers from the Dewashung. Before that, when the people in Litang made war with the GMD, they requested support with arms and the Dewashung sent 2-3 people here to make bullets.   

**Q:**  They knew how to make new bullets, right?   

**A:**  Probably those were the bullets used for the Tibetan matchlock guns. In the beginning, we caused hardship for the Chinese, but later, about 3,000 Chinese army reinforcements (Tib. magnön [དམག་སྣོན]) arrived there. They came at night. The Chinese were going and coming at night. They were not going in the daytime because they were afraid the people would see them. After that, the Chinese soldiers surrounded the monastery. The Chinese Regimental Commander [Ch. tuan zhang] who had pockmarks on his face led 2,000 soldiers.   

**Q:**  He was the same person called Chalagjan, the one with webbed fingers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, there were 2-3 Regimental Commanders. In the early morning, at daybreak, when I looked down from the top of the mountain behind the monastery, I saw the Chinese leaders sitting on a high place and the soldiers sitting below that.   

**Q:**  Had the Chinese soldiers come onto the top of the mountain behind the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, they were planning to take the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you see the soldiers climbing the mountain?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it near the monastery?   

**A:**  Their bullets could reach the monastery. At that time, the Chinese leaders were giving a kind of lectures [to the soldiers]. We in the monastery, meanwhile, had also prepared for fighting. The Chinese soldiers came from two places. On this side it was called Drongpön and on the other side it was called the Tseshar hermitage. The Chinese leader was carrying a pistol and from behind the Chinese soldiers, he was making his soldiers shoot the Jiguan machine gun. At that moment, if the Chinese soldiers retreated, the commanders were shooting pistols and killing them right away. Many Chinese soldiers were killed in that fighting.   

**Q:**  At that moment, when the Chinese came down from two directions, did they fight with the people in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the fighting take place inside the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese were charging forward inside the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did all the Chinese coming from two directions enter the monastery?   

**A:**  The Chinese soldiers coming from the backside couldn't get into the monastery very much. I heard that 25 Chinese soldiers coming from the front entered the monastery first. They jumped over the wall of the monastery. When they entered the monastery, the Tibetan soldiers shot them and they also seized them, and stabbed and killed many of them when they could reach them.   

**Q:**  Were those monk soldiers?   

**A:**  There were monks and also militia who were then in the monastery.   

**Q:**  At that moment, they had hand-to-hand combat, right?   

**A:**  Yes. All the Chinese soldiers who entered the monastery were killed, none of them could flee. The Chinese soldiers coming from the backside of the monastery confronted many Tibetan soldiers. So they were unable to come into the monastery. From the front there were a group of 25 and a group of 15-16 soldiers who entered the monastery. I heard they were carrying shovels and they were digging pits, probably for placing bombs. Most of these soldiers were carrying guns. All the Chinese who entered the monastery were killed. There were many Chinese at the back of the monastery. They were coming down like sheep and goats. The people in our place were fond of guns and shooting from their childhood, so we all were crack shots and killed many Chinese. On the top of the monastery, there was a building called Tsephodrang [Tib. རྩེ་ཕོ་བྲང]. I was in that building.   

**Q:**  Was that a small monastery?   

**A:**  That was the highest building at the top of the monastery.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that a palace for the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. Under that building there was the residence for the Litang Kyamgön [Rimpoche]. There were many Tibetan soldiers in that building and they killed many Chinese soldiers. The Tibetans waited for the Chinese coming from Drongpön, and many soldiers were killed from both sides and there was blood in the stream flowing from that place. This water was the drinking water and we didn't have any choice but to use that water. The water had become the color of brewed tea. The stream flowing from both sides became the color of brewed tea and we had to drink that water. I can't tell you the exact number of casualties in that battle, but, when the Chinese took the monastery, their leader gave a lecture saying that there were only 25 of his soldiers were left.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese soldiers did they have at that time?   

**A:**  Probably, they had about 2,000 soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were many of your people killed also?   

**A:**  Yes, our people were also killed a little bit, but there were not many casualties because we were inside the monastery and when the Chinese were charging forward we shot at them from inside the monastery. We also captured Jiguan machine guns and cannons from the Chinese, but we didn't know how to use the cannons. We didn't have Jiguan machine guns except for the few Jiguans given by Pandatsang. At that moment, there was a Chinese man in the monastery who was from the GMD and knew how to fire cannons. When the Chinese soldiers had put up tents on the mountain top, he fired the cannons at the Chinese tents.   

**Q:**  Was that Chinese person in the monastery from there previously?   

**A:**  I am not sure about that. Anyway, he was there when the war broke out.   

**Q:**  Do you the know the name of that Chinese man?   

**A:**  No. I heard that he fired cannons at the Chinese soldier's tents and killed many of them.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese fire cannons into the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. They were firing Jiguan machine guns and cannons. They had many weapons.   

**Q:**  And they had 2,000 soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, again 3,000 soldiers came. Finally, 15,000 soldiers came and they surrounded the monastery. When the monastery was surrounded, the Tibetan fighters in the monastery couldn't get out because were surrounded by two circles of Chinese soldiers. The walls of the monastery were built with earth and we thought that the walls were destroyed by the cannons, but later we came to know that they were not destroyed by the canons. They were actually destroyed by the bombs called Drobom which were placed under the walls. These destroyed the walls in some parts. When I got there, I saw there were 10 Chinese soldiers killed in that place. A young Chinese soldier was stabbed in the leg and when he took off his pants and tried to treat his wounds, he was also shot dead. I saw that all the Chinese corpses were facing with their heads backwards. Probably, they had tried to run away. The corpses had a very bad odor and I couldn't stand nearby. After that, a Chinese soldier entered the monastery, but they didn't have the time to shoot him and they had to do hand-to-hand combat. They said they couldn't kill the Chinese man right away in the hand-to-hand combat because he was very dexterous (Tib. མལ་དེཏྲ [མ་ལག་བདེ་དྲགས]). So another soldier came and shot him.   

**Q:**  Was that during the first fighting?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How long did they fight the first battle?   

**A:**  It took 26 days and nights.   

**Q:**  Did you fight continuously and did the Chinese come continuously during this 26 days and nights?   

**A:**  Yes, one day, at about 11-12 a.m., a plane came. At that moment, the Tibetan soldiers were inside the monastery and the Chinese were outside. The plane was shooting machine guns against the Chinese bunkers. Probably, they made a mistake and shot their bunkers. Our people didn't know that and said that it was an American plane. Some of them said that it was a Taiwanese plane. The plane then made a round and went back. When it came back, we knew that it was a Communist plane.   

**Q:**  Did the plane shoot at the monastery?   

**A:**  When it came back, it shot at the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did it drop bombs?   

**A:**  Yes, it bombed the monastery.   

**Q:**  This wasn't the time when they bombed the monastery and destroyed the monastery completely, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Sogri Khedön [Tib.?] and Ngawang Tengye etc., four people had been given the titles of county head. They had been sent to Dartsedo from the monastery to tell the Chinese to withdraw their troops from Litang. After that, they were given their guns back and were sent back to the monastery while the battle was going on to tell the people in the monastery to stop the fighting. I saw them in the monastery. Among them, Sogri Khedön was one of the better people in the monastery. Although the Chinese had given him a high title, he was a kind person (Tib. སེམཔ་ཡགཔོ [སེམས་པ་ཡག་པོ]). The four of them talked at night in the monastery and said, "If we make war against the Chinese, we will only suffer loss and will not get any benefit (Tib. གྱོང་མ་གཏོགས་ཁེ་རག་ཡས་མེད]) because the Chinese are powerful and they have things to fly in the sky and things to send on the earth (Tib. nam mkha' la lding yas/ sa la gtong yas]. We don't have anything. We don't even know how to make bullets. So we can't challenge the Chinese."   

**Q:**  Did they come into the monastery and say that?   

**A:**  Yes. That was when the war was taking place. They said, "We should do something to delay the liberation [reforms] for three years. By that time, if there would be war from other countries, we can find a way out." But some of our people said, "We don't trust the Chinese."   

**Q:**  Were those people from the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably he was called Gawa Champa, [Tib. དགའ་བ་བྱམས་པ]. He died after he came to India. Another person was called Seru Champa. They said, "We will not accept what the Chinese say, that we have to surrender. The Chinese are not trustworthy. What did they say in those early times? They said that people have religious freedom and we have come to help the people, and when the nationality and people get developed, we will go back." Bapa Phüntso Wangye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] and the Sera Abbot Ngawang Gyatso [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྒྱ་མཚོ] had also said that. The Chinese have deceived people many times. Later, the Chinese Regimental Commander Lagsha talked about the white and the black path. At that point, a monk called Yama Thöndrup said, "In the 17-Point Agreement you Chinese had said like this. but now you are telling us to hand over our weapons and have said that the white path is peaceful and the black one is the one of military force. There is a big change between the previous talk and the present." The Chinese leader then talked about yesterday's weather and today's weather. So our people didn't trust the Chinese because they had deceived us many times. When they didn't accept that, Khargya Ngawang Tengye, etc., the four of them, went back to the Chinese building. At that time, there were three Chinese spies among the people living outside the monastery. They were spying on what the Tibetans were doing.   

**Q:**  Did they come to spy inside the monastery?   

**A:**  Probably, they were also coming inside the monastery. At first we didn't know that they were spies. The Chinese had a hard time when their drinking water was stopped, and they were planning to come out and withdraw. Our Tibetan fighters saw one of the spies tie a white cloth on a stick and go inside the Chinese building, so we knew that the person called Buga was definitely a Chinese spy. He told the Chinese that the Tibetan soldiers had run out of ammunition, so the Chinese didn't withdraw and later the Chinese reinforcements came. Later, the spies were seized and beaten by the Tibetan militia, and they told all these things. Three of the spies were killed.   

**Q:**  Who killed them?   

**A:**  The Tibetan soldiers killed them.   

**Q:**  One of the spies went to the Chinese building, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but he came back to spy after he went to the Chinese, and he was the main person. He also was killed. There were three people with him. Two of them were probably killed and I think they couldn't kill one of them. After that a spy came back. He was seized and interrogated, and he told [us] what he did. He was also killed. This was at the time when we were making war.   

**Q:**  Do you know the names of the spies?   

**A:**  The one who came back was called Buga and the other had a Chinese name. Maybe his father was a Chinese or his mother was Chinese.   

**Q:**  Buga was a pure Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably he was. After that, the Chinese made us to suffer. If the plane hadn't come, we were supposed to fight for some more days. The people who came to talk in the monastery had said, "Today one plane has come. If you don't accept the terms, tomorrow 6-8 planes will come and all the people regardless [of] whether they are monks or laymen will be destroyed completely." The people in the monastery then held a meeting and discussed whether we should no longer stay in the monastery and should get out. If we stayed in the monastery and if the planes came we would be destroyed. At that time, I was staying on guard in the monastery and I didn't get sleep for seven days.   

**Q:**  Did you stay on guard in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. That night I felt very sleepy. At that time, Seru Champa was going to the meeting and he brought all the news regarding the meeting. That night I told Seru Champa, "Please stay on guard for tonight. I have to go home to get some sleep because I am very tired due to having had no sleep for many days. On the other hand, when we talk with the people, they are not listening well." He said, "You are not to be blamed, you really have had a hard time. I know that. But, please stay for only tonight. Tomorrow, I will stay on guard." He refused to stay on guard duty and he didn't tell me that they had discussed at the meeting about leaving the monastery. We had this kind of thing internally, but he was fighting with the Chinese quite well. He was the person who pointed his gun towards the Chinese at the Chinese meeting. After that, he left saying that he had to attend the meeting. At that time, I had a partner called Napo Chödrag [Tib. སྣ་པོ་ཆོས་གྲགས]. I gave him my monk's cloak and I told him to stay on guard here for that night because I have to go home to get sleep because I hadn't get sleep for many days.   

**Q:**  While you were staying on guard in the monastery, were they continuously fighting?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, when they bombed the monastery, the smoke didn't vanish for 1-2 hours.   

**Q:**  How many planes were there?   

**A:**  There was only one plane.   

**Q:**  Did it bomb the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. It bombed near to a corner [Tib. དགོན་པའི་ཟུར] of the monastery and they said that tomorrow 6-8 planes would come. When I was going down, I saw that the white shrapnel of the bombs had scattered over there, and they had also shot bren-guns at the house and the bullets were so long. Many people were killed. After that, when I went to my quarters, I saw that the pieces of meat that had been hung up to dry were shaking like this because of the strength of the bombardment. My brothers told me to eat small pieces of dough mixed with butter [Tib. བག་ཚ་མར་ཁུ], but I told them, "I can't control myself from feeling sleepy so I don't want to eat. They insisted and told me to eat. Then, while I was eating, one of my neighbors came over and said, "Champa and those people are saddling their horses and they are fleeing." I said, "If they are going, we also have to leave. We shouldn't stay here. We should go because if the plane bombs us, it will destroy us." He said that he will saddle his horse and come along. I didn't get time to sleep, and packed up things that I could take with me and hid the things that I couldn't take. So that night when we left there were many people leaving.   

**Q:**  People started to flee, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But the war was still going on, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Chinese had surrounded the monastery.   

**Q:**  So people couldn't get out. What did they do?   

**A:**  We had to cross two Chinese bunkers near the monastery. We could hear the sounds of the Chinese talking. We left via the Khago Changma [Tib. མཁར་སྒོ་བྱང་མ].   

**Q:**  Was that a name of a gate?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the name of the northern gate of the monastery. Everyone had gathered there like sheep and goats, but people were not going out. They were just talking a lot. At that point, I told Alo Khanchong, "If we are going out, let's go out. If we are not going out, let's go back in the monastery. Otherwise, the Chinese will shoot Jiguan machine guns and destroy us." There was a person called Atshong who was a tough guy. His group had about 15-20 people and they said, "Let's get out from here." We went out and when we reached a pasture, Deyong Atrin had already arrived there with about 20 people. We got together with them from that place and we took a rest on the plain. We had to get around the mountain corner [Tib. རི་ཟུར] where the Chinese were.   

**Q:**  You had to go through the place where the Chinese were, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that point, Atrin said, "Let's take a rest." Atrin's group had about 20 people and we had about 15-20 people. Atrin said, "We should leave the elderly and the horses behind, and 10 of our high quality fighters should go ahead and destroy the Chinese bunker and then we should get out of here." I agreed with him and I was among the people going ahead. My brother and I were among the ten people. At that moment, one of our soldier's leg got caught in the Chinese telephone wire, so he cut off the wire with his sword. There were no Chinese in the place where we went. A little farther away, there was a Chinese bunker and we could hear the dog barking. The Chinese had those dogs called Alsatian. We were kind of lucky because there wasn't a single Chinese in that bunker. When we got on the mountain pass, there was a plain on the other side of the mountain, and at that point we felt relaxed and I fell asleep on my horse. So another person had to hold me on the horse. After that, we reached the mountain pass called Dragkar La [Tib. བྲག་དཀར་ལ], which was half way to the monastery [from his home].   

**Q:**  After you ten people left, did the other people follow you?   

**A:**  Yes. They came out from everywhere.   

**Q:**  Most of the people were leaving, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese shoot the people who were leaving?   

**A:**  Yes, they shot and killed many Tibetans. The Tibetans didn't have military training so they went out walking one after another, and they didn't know how to wear their clothes when making war. They were wearing their best clothes [i.e., fancy bright brocades]. They became like a target for the Chinese. The Tibetans were going out like sheep and goats and the Chinese had [in English] automatic weapons. So they killed a large number of people on that day.   

**Q:**  Can you give me a rough number?   

**A:**  It was written in Lotse's book that about 2,000 Tibetans were killed on that day.   

**Q:**  Most of them were the people running away from the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many people were able to flee at that time?   

**A:**  I can't tell you the number. There were many Tibetan fighters outside the monastery also. We had tea on the Dragkar La mountain pass and I fell asleep. The bridegroom of our family told me to get up and drink tea. At that moment, we could hear the sounds of the cannons but we couldn't hear the gun shots because it was far away. When we got home, I fell asleep and they rested while talking to each other. After a while, they said let's go. I was going in the wrong direction as I was not fully awake. My uncle Dargye [Tib. དར་རྒྱས] said to me, "Why are you going upwards. Come on down." I was like a drunk person. My younger brother Trinley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས] went ahead with some loaded mules. On that day, he was confronted by the Chinese and although his horse was killed, he was able to flee.   

**Q:**  Your brother Trinley is here with you, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he is. After I got home, I went upstairs to sleep.   

**Q:**  Your home was in the agricultural area, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Weren't there Chinese there?   

**A:**  No, there weren't. It was one day's journey from the monastery.   

**Q:**  The battlefield was only in the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Had many farmers come to the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The war didn't take place in the agricultural area [Tib. ཡུལ་པ], right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that moment I could still hear the sounds of the cannons and the planes. We thought that the Chinese might come to our place, so we couldn't stay at home. At about 3 p.m. we took some food and went to a safe place called Drongo [Tib. གྲོང་མགོ]. We stayed there for about 15 days. My brothers met some fighters running away, but I didn't meet many people. At that time, our Lama, Gasi [Tib. ག་གཟི] Rimpoche was in retreat in a hermitage called Shelri [Tib. ཤེལ་རི].   

**Q:**  Gasitsang [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང] was the name of the labrang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you the chandzö of that labrang?   

**A:**  My elder brothers were like the chandzö of that labrang. The former Lama had just passed his Geshe exam and he was staying in the hermitage.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese destroy the labrang?   

**A:**  Yes. The labrang was in the monastery. After the labrang was destroyed, the lama stayed in the hermitage.   

**Q:**  That was why he didn't have any problem because he was in the hermitage, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, if the lama wanted to go to Lhasa, we planned to go with him to Lhasa. If the lama didn't go, we also planned not to go. At that moment, my elder brother rode his horse and went to see the lama. He said that he had made preparations for the lama to leave. At that moment, my mother told us, "Please, you guys, do not stay here. If you stay here, we will have a very hard time. Please go to Lhasa temporarily." There was a Geshe called Dralha Geshe [Tib. དགྲ་ལྷ་དགེ་བཤེས] who was our neighbor. We asked him to do a divination. He said that it would be good to go to Lhasa. After that, we went to the hot springs located below the hermitage where our lama was staying and we sent my younger brother Trinley to call the Lama at that place. The lama and Trinley came when it was almost dark because the lama had to go [first] to the place where a person had died. We stayed there 3 days with the lama.   

**Q:**  Did you decide to go to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Not yet. We told the lama that we should go to Lhasa temporarily. My mother also told us go to Lhasa and the divination also said it would be good to go.   

**Q:**  While you guys were planning to go to Lhasa, were they still fighting in the monastery?   

**A:**  At that moment, Yönrupön and those people were still fighting.   

**Q:**  The Chinese hadn't bombed the monastery and completely destroyed it, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  While they were still fighting, you got out from the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After we left the monastery that night, the next morning the Chinese entered the monastery. There were only elderly and young monks in the monastery. [However] Yönrupön and those people didn't leave the monastery and they had been fighting. After that, most of the elderly monks surrendered.   

**Q:**  A large number of Chinese entered the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that the 15,000 Chinese soldiers?   

**A:**  Probably, it was that troop. We didn't know for sure.   

**Q:**  You just heard about that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. People didn't know when the Chinese soldiers would come. They were always going and coming at night. In the monastery, some people surrendered. Yönrupön's brother Dagö Thöndrup [Tib. ཟླ་རྒོད་དོན་གྲུབ] was then 26 years old and Yönrupön Sonam Wangye [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དབང་རྒྱལ] was about 24 years old. The two of them fought with the Chinese and killed many Chinese. Finally, Dagö was shot and bombed, and his hand and leg were wounded. Then their ammunition ran out, but they didn't get hit with bullets because of their protective talisman (Tib. tsönsung [མཚོན་སྲུང]). So they threw away their protective talisman saying that Chinese would seize them and torture them so it would be better to die. At that point, the Chinese Regimental Commander tied up all the arrested people in the monastery and made them kneel down in Shiwa Khamtsen with the Chinese soldiers surrounding them. The Commander said, "Most of my soldiers were killed in this place, so I am going to burn it down completely. I am not going to leave a single statue, even the size of a thumb, and a single monk." At that point, the Chinese leader named Representative Lo [Ch. luo dai biao] said, "We don't have an order from Mao Zedong to burn the monastery." I heard that he said that from other people who knew Chinese language. The Regimental Commander told Representative Lo, "You don't need to tell me anything. I will tell Mao Zedong about this even if I have to kneel down in front of him or stand in front of him. I will not leave the monastery alone. I am going to burn it down." At that moment, Yönrupön said that he was going to surrender and he called the Chinese leader to come to accept his surrender. He said that "As a leader, I will not surrender to an ordinary soldier." The Chinese had given Yönrupön the title called Maoyi Gongsi, the [leader of a] Trade Company [Ch. mao yi dong si]. A Chinese soldier told his leader about Maoyi Gongsi Yönrupön's surrender.   

**Q:**  Did that Chinese commander say that he was going to burn the monks and the villagers in the Shiwa Khamtsen with the house?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that point, did Yönrupön say, "Don't burn them. I will surrender to the leader"?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that the Chinese commander was giving a lecture carrying a long sword in one hand and a cigarette in his left hand. When he heard that Yönrupön was going to surrender, he was extremely glad and threw down the sword and cigarette.   

**Q:**  Why was he glad?   

**A:**  Because, he heard that Yönrupön was going to surrender. Then Yönrupön told him, "You are the leader, so I am going to surrender to you," and he handed over his rifle and pistol, and then took out another pistol and shot the Chinese leader on his forehead and killed him right there.   

**Q:**  Did he shoot him immediately?   

**A:**  Yes. Otherwise, he would be arrested. At that point, the Chinese soldiers had surrounded that place. So they shot Yönrupön and killed him. Then the Chinese put the bodies of the Chinese leader and Yönrupön side by side and took photos. After that, they attached a rope to the Yönrupön's neck and they dragged him away. Khargya Ngawang Tengye who was from Yönru told the Chinese, "You shouldn't do that. If you drag Yönrupön's body like this, the people will oppose us severely." So the Chinese stopped dragging it out.   

**Q:**  Khargya Ngawang Tengye was also arrested, right?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. He was one of the people who came to the monastery to talk. Dagö was wounded, and arrested and imprisoned in a big Chinese house.   

**Q:**  At that moment, the Chinese had already bombed the Litang Monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they destroy the monastery?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. Later, a Chinese plane came over, but they didn't bomb the monastery again.   

**Q:**  But, all the people in the monastery were killed or surrendered, right?   

**A:**  Yes, so they didn't need to bomb the monastery.   

**Q:**  So, killing Yönrupön was the end of the war at the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, the prisoners were brought to the Chinese regiment where there were watch-towers in the four directions of the wall, and the Chinese soldiers had set up bren-guns in all the directions. One Chinese soldier was carrying a sten-gun between each 2-3 prisoners who were made to kneel down. When the leaders were giving lectures, if the prisoners would raise their heads, the soldiers would press their heads down with their guns.   

**Q:**  How many people were arrested?   

**A:**  I can't tell you the number. Probably, there might haven been about 1,000.   

**Q:**  All of the monks and the farmers are included in that numbers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, all of the elderly people and wounded are also included. After that, the Chinese leader came to see Dagö and asked him what comments [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] he had. Dagö said, "Do you want me to tell my comment? If you want my comment, bring me a gun and I will tell you my comment."   

