# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0227.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Gasitsang, Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང, ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** August 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Shelling  
**Name:** Gasitsang, Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང, ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 80  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས] was a monk from Litang Monastery who became part of the revolt against the Chinese in Litang. He is the younger brother of Litang Lotse, who was part of the first group of CIA trainees. In this interview, he discusses the fighting in Litang, the discussions about organizing a group in Lhasa, and finally, the activities of Phurbu Tseden, the last Litang insurgent to surrender in 1971.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0227_03/H_0227_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me if you have left out anything from the previous interviews.   

**A:**  In the past, when the Chinese came to our homeland, most of our traders were going to Dartsedo. The traders saw that the Chinese arrested people and they were killing 15-20 people every day in the place called Gyayi Tago [Tib.?].   

**Q:**  Who were those people?   

**A:**  We were not sure whether they were Chinese or the people of Dartsedo. Anyway, they were well-to-do, big households.   

**Q:**  Did you see them killing those people?   

**A:**  We didn't see them, but the other traders saw them. I heard that they dug pits, and they stuck letters on the chest of the prisoners and made them stand on the pit. After announcing their crimes, then they shot them and whether they were dead or not, they just threw them in the pit.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That might be in 1951-52. The traders saw that so they were saying that the Chinese were not good. They were killing 15-20 people every day. Later, the Chinese knew about that and they took the prisoners to China and they were killing them somewhere in China. At that time, when our traders went to China, they bought cheap things that had been robbed from the big households in China. The traders said that the Chinese were making the leaders and the rich people suffer limitlessly. The Chinese were not treating people well. When we heard about that, we knew that the Chinese would not treat us well. Before the war broke out in Litang, the Chinese brought about 500 small households to the Chinese Headquarters [Tib. རྒྱ་ཁང] and they didn't let them leave. The Chinese made them make comments (Tib. སནཆར [བསམ་འཆར]) every day.   

**Q:**  Were those people like beggars?   

**A:**  They were not real beggars. They were poor households. The Chinese asked them, "How did the well-to-do, big households make you suffer in the past? Did they treat you well or did they make you suffer? You had been suffering limitlessly under the landlord class (Tib. སད་ཏྲེརིམ [ས་བདག་གྲལ་རིམ]) and the bureaucratism (Tib. pön ngan ringlu [དཔོན་ངན་རིང་ལུགས]). So now you should tell us whatever comments you have against the big households or the leaders. The People's Republic of China will back you. Now all people are equal. You don't need to live under the landlord class and bureaucratism. You will become the heads." Most of those people couldn't think about the long run future and they just held some personal grudges against the people who didn't treat them well and criticized them saying that they made them suffer. The Chinese made them stand on a chair and talk. The Chinese made notes, and gave them 5-10 dayan and told them "You made a good comment. The People's Republic of China is like your parents."   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was just before the war took place in Litang. That was in the winter of 1955. They kept them in the Chinese Headquarters for about a month, and made them hold meetings every day and didn't let them leave. When they would go to the toilet, a Chinese soldier would go at the front and another would follow behind.   

**Q:**  They were also like prisoners, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Some of them had made many criticisms. And then they were let out and they were told that they were not allowed to talk about the comments that were made. And in case they hear about that, the punishment would be execution. Before that, we had some friends, and we used to call them to the monastery and give them food at the time of the festivals. Some of them came to the monastery, but they didn't dare to talk about that. Some of them just told a little bit about that. Anyway, it was hard for them talk about that. They were just saying, "It is not good. It seems that the Chinese will not treat us well" (Tib. ཡཔོ་སོས་མརེ [ཡག་པོ་བཟོ་ས་མ་རེད]). But they didn't dare to talk about what the Chinese told them. However, some of them told Gyadotsang Aku [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་ཚང་ཨ་ཁུ], who had a good relation with them that, "It is definite that the Chinese will not treat you well. They are making this kind of plan and they are making us tell comments." They said, "The People's Republic of China is like your parents. You had been suffering under the landlord class until now. You don't need to live under them. We will destroy them completely." Gyadotsang Aku [a wealthy Litang family] was a tough person, so he took his gold, silver, coral, dayan coins and his better guns, and with about 80 horses and mules, went up to Lhasa before the war broke out. They also had a lot of barley, but they couldn't take that. Before that, Gyado Wangdü [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་དབང་འདུས] was in Lhasa, and Gyado Thöndrub and Aku went later. After that, the war was about to break out.   

**Q:**  When you heard about the meeting of 500 poor people, what did you think?   

**A:**  Most of the thoughtful people were thinking that "We should fight with the Chinese. Otherwise, if we remain like this, the Chinese will destroy us completely. What the Chinese said before and what they said later doesn't match." After that, as I told you before, they called the meeting of the 25 people.   

**Q:**  The meeting in the monastery was held after the 500 poor people were called, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you think that you would win if you fought with the Chinese?   

**A:**  We didn't think about winning and losing. We thought that we could fight well with the Chinese and each person could kill 15-20 Chinese. It was New Year, but we couldn't celebrate it well because mentally we were not happy. In the monastery, we were holding meetings every night and the situation was becoming more and more disturbed (Tib. སིངཇ [ཟིང་ཆ]). Therefore, we had to make war with the Chinese. After that, when we came up [to Lhasa], Chushigandru had already made the golden throne in the Jokhang courtyard. There were many chandzö working on the golden throne and Aku Khechog was the nyerpa. I, however, was young and didn't have responsibilities. Radru Ngawang and those people had responsibilities, and he and Champa Kaldan [Tib. བྱམས་པ་སྐལ་ལྡན] were the people buying things. They had 7,000 sang of gold. They did a lottery and we were obliged to go to burn incense on the Bumpari [Tib. བུམ་པ་རི] Mountain. There were six of us. We were all youngsters and I remember the name of Phüntso Tomden [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་སྟོབས་ལྡན], who was also called Buga [Tib. བུ་དགའ]. The two of us were same age and there was Gombo Tsering [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཚེ་རིང]. When we went to Trip [Tib. གྲིབ], Trijang Rimpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] was giving a teaching in a park. Early the next morning we attached the prayer flags and burned the incense on Bumpari, and then came back to Lhasa at 3 p.m. We were young and carefree. The people of Litang living in Lhasa attended the celebration of the birthday of the Dalai Lama called Trungla Yarsö [Tib. འཁྲུངས་ལྷ་དབྱར་གསོལ] every year. In that year, there were about 200 riders and there were two Tibetan soldiers from the Trapchi Regiment with us. All of us had a rifle and a pistol. Gyado Thöndrub and Andrutsang Ngawang Phunjung rode motorcycles. The Chinese living in Chamdo Phagpalha's [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] house were looking at us. I thought that the Chinese might have been laughing at us. After we burned incense, and ate meat and bread, they did the target shooting. After that, the horses were sent to one's own residence and all the people gathered in Andrutsang's courtyard. And according to Khamba custom, the leaders were made to sit on thrones made from loads of brick tea, and the people from Litang danced our homeland dances. The courtyard was full of people. Many Chinese spies might have been among the people. At that time, the Khambas hadn't gone to Lhoka and Andru Jinda hadn't made the decision [of] what work we should do. So we were worried about that. Therefore, 6 of us, all from Litang --Radru Ngawang, the chabu of Litang monastery Gawa Champa [Tib. དགའ་བ་བྱམས་པ], Phüntso Tobgye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་སྟོབས་རྒྱས], Chödrag [Tib. ཆོས་གྲགས], Sonam Gyatso [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ]--we held a meeting on the pasture below the Potala Palace and discussed what we should do. "If we remain like this, one day the Chinese will destroy us completely if our secret is revealed."   

**Q:**  Was that a secret meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, we had sworn that we would not tell anyone about the meeting. At the meeting, we discussed that Andru Jinda was not making any decisions. So we should make a plan.   

**Q:**  This meeting was held in 1957, when the golden throne was offered, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [Note: That is incorrect. It was in Fall 1956.]  

**Q:**  At that time, it was not decided that Andru Jinda would go to Lhoka, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was between that period. We decided to prepare 40 riders, and sent loads of brick tea in coracles down the river and go to Lhoka pretending to be traders. Later, there might have been about 200 riders. "It will not be alright if we do not make a plan to make war with the Chinese. Otherwise, if we remain like this, one day, we will be destroyed completely." We made the plan to go to Kongpo and most of the people planned to go Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Did you make this plan for the people of Litang exclusively?   

**A:**  At the beginning, we planned exclusively for the people of Litang and we swore that we would not tell this even to our relatives.   

**Q:**  Did you tell Andru Jinda about that?   

**A:**  Yes. We went to tell him and we were saying that we had to collect arms. While each of the traders had a gun, [they] only [had] about 100 bullets so we could not challenge the Chinese with this amount of ammunition.   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  We made this plan and said that we should tell Andru Jinda and Jinda should tell this to the Dewashung, and the Dewashung should support us with weapons. Then we went to tell Jinda. Usually, Jinda used to stay in a room above the gate from where he could see us coming in. But, on that day, he was staying in his Tara Temple [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང]. We told Jinda about our plan and told him, "Now, you Jinda have a plan, but you are not making decisions. If we remain like this, one day the Chinese will destroy us completely. By that time, we won't be able to make any moves under the Chinese. So before the Chinese touch us, it will be better to go out [of Lhasa]. If we stay like this, we can not succeed" We also told Andru Jinda, "We made a plan and we also have made a decision. But, in terms of time and other things, it might be difficult for you to come with us. But you should take the responsibility and request support with arms to Dewashung. You have asked for arms support in the past and now you should ask it again because you have relations with the Dewashung. If we don't have weapons, we can't challenge the Chinese. We are going ahead and Jinda should come later on. The most important thing is the arms support." In response, Jinda told us, "Now it is too early to do that. Sooner or later, this is the only way that we should go. We have asked the Dewashung for arms many times, but the Dewashung didn't give us any answers. It is also difficult for the Dewashung to make the decision right away because there are many people in the Dewashung who have relations with the Chinese. It is like variegated color (Tib. ཏྲཏྲ་བཏ [ཁྲ་ཁྲ་བ་ཁྲ]) [there all different kinds of people --no unity]. So the government is also facing hardships. We are doing something secretly, but we can't decide right away. I can't say what will happen in the future. Anyway, your plan is good. Sooner or later we have to go on that path, but you should never tell any people outside. You said that the six of you have sworn that you will never tell anyone. You shouldn't tell this even to your relatives. If the Chinese knew that, we would get destroyed in a few minutes. You should get prepared, and one day, we have to go on that path either to Kongpo or to Lhoka." When Andru Jinda said that, although we had decided to go, we couldn't put it into action right away. After that, when we requested help from the Americans, the Americans told us to prepare 40 people for training. One day, Jinda called me and said, "We have to send 40 people for training. Do you want to go? I told him, "I will go. We shouldn't stay like this. We know how to shoot guns because we had been using guns and riding horses from childhood, but this is useless for challenging the Chinese. We have had experience in fighting with the Chinese. They are using cannons, Jiguan machine guns, and bombs and bren-guns. We are just shooting rifles with only five bullets. So we should get training for using big weapons. If we would get training in America, they will teach us how to use the big weapons."   

**Q:**  Is that a machine gun, what the Chinese called it, Jiguan [Tib. ཇི་གུཨན]?   

**A:**  The machine gun could be loaded with 1,000 bullets, but the Jiguan could be loaded with only 30 bullets in the magazine, which is stuck in from the bottom. Then Jinda said, "Do you want me to register your name?" I said yes. Then he told me to get prepared. "I will work on the passport." At that time, we could get a passport if we said that we were going for pilgrimage or for trade. After that, I went to see Athar [Tib. ཨ་ཐར] and Lotse [Tib. བློ་ཚེ].   

**Q:**  Athar and Lotse had got the training and they had come back, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I worked with them for about a year secretly. They were going everywhere. After that, we were sent to India and there were 5-6 people with me. Later, 11 people from Litang came. Altogether they were about 20 people from Litang.   

**Q:**  After that, you went to Okinawa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན] was killed, your brothers had already left Litang, right?   

**A:**  No, we hadn't. We were in Litang.   

**Q:**  You were not in the Litang monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we had left the monastery.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for leaving the monastery, please tell me again?   

**A:**  In Litang Monastery the war took place for 26 days and nights. If the Chinese plane hadn't bombed the monastery, we were planning to fight. When the Chinese bombed the monastery, We were telling each other that the Chinese will kill of us in the same place.   

**Q:**  The Chinese said they were going to bomb the monastery. Did the Chinese actually bomb the monastery?   

**A:**  They dropped one bomb.   

**Q:**  That was why you left the monastery, right?   

**A:**  On that night, Seru Kheton [Tib. ?] and those people were sent by the Chinese to the monastery and they told us not to fight. They said, "If you fight with the Chinese, you will not get any benefit. It is like the proverb, 'A finger cannot poke the sky' [Tib. མཛུབ་མོས་གནམ་མ་འཕིག]. We should make friends (Tib. thündri che [mthun sgril byas] with the Chinese and try to delay the liberation for 2-3 years. If a war would start by the foreign countries, we might get a chance. Otherwise, in terms of number of people, if you make war with the Chinese and they didn't counter attack at all, and even if the Chinese would stretch their necks and let the Tibetans cut their necks with swords, you would not be capable of doing that. The Chinese have everything, such as the things to fly in the sky and things to go into the earth, and we don't have anything. So we cannot challenge the Chinese. In case, you here [incomplete sentence--but it must be: do not surrender], tomorrow, six Chinese planes will come. If they bomb the monastery, the monastery will be completely destroyed and made it into ashes."  

**Q:**  Because of that, you decided to leave the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they told you that six Chinese planes would come, what did you think?   

**A:**  We heard about the talk in the meeting later on. At that time, we didn't hear about that. And the Chinese plane had already come once and threw a bomb, so we just guessed that the plane would come tomorrow. We thought that if the planes came and dropped two bombs, the monastery would be destroyed completely. At the same time, the monks, the militias, the elderly people and the children who had filled the monastery would be destroyed completely. So, it would be better to leave the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you hold a meeting?   

**A:**  We didn't hold a meeting, we were just thinking in that way.   

**Q:**  When Yönrupön was killed, you were in your home, not in the monastery, right?   

**A:**  We heard about that 1-2 days after we reached our homeland.   

**Q:**  After the monastery was lost and Yönrupön was killed, did the war stop for a month or did they fight the battle continuously?   

**A:**  They had been fighting continuously.   

**Q:**  Didn't they stop fighting for about a month?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They had been fighting for many years.   

**Q:**  After Yönrupön was killed, the leaders, like Deyong Atrin [Tib. དེ་ཡོང་ཨ་འཕྲིན], were staying outside the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Deyong Atrin left the monastery with us.   

**Q:**  After you got out with Deyong Atrin, did you fight?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. After that, we got scattered.   

**Q:**  After that, who fought the battle continuously?   

**A:**  Deyong Atrin was appointed as the leader when they made the war in the monastery.   

**Q:**  After that, did Deyong Atrin conscript the soldiers?   

**A:**  After he got out from the monastery, when he was still holding the regiment, the soldiers who had scattered all over Ngari Shingkham [Tib. མངའ་རིས་ཞིང་ཁམས] gathered together with him.   

**Q:**  What is Ngari Shingkham?   

**A:**  This is the name of the whole area of Litang, including Chantreng and the places located below Ba. Later, the regiment became bigger and they fought continuously.   

**Q:**  After that, they fought guerrilla warfare, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, there were the regiments and there were also groups [Tib. ཚོ་ཁག]. These groups fought guerrilla warfare against the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did they fight continuously until 1958?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the fighting conclude in 1958?   

**A:**  Probably, in 1958 the main battles were concluded. But the last fighting ended in 1971.   

**Q:**  Those people lived in the forest and they didn't have human food to eat, so they ate wild plants and they had a hard time, right?   

**A:**  At the end, there was one of our relatives called Phurbu Tseden [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་ཚེ་བརྟན]. When he was in the monastery, I used to teach him and another relative called Dralu a little bit of pecha. At that time, he might have been 8-9 years old. Later he became the best at fighting battles.   

**Q:**  Is he still alive?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the last person who surrendered to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Where is he now?   

**A:**  He is in Litang. The Chinese didn't make him suffer. He had been going with another person called Shugu Bulu for many years.   

**Q:**  Did he surrender in 1971?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is he related to you?   

**A:**  Yes, his grandfather and my grandfather were brothers.   

**Q:**  The main battle ended in 1958, right?   

**A:**  Yes, among the remaining people, some of them were arrested and some of them were killed.   

**Q:**  After that, there were just a few people hiding in the forest, right?   

**A:**  In 1971, the two of them were in the mountains. The Chinese made their family members suffer very severely and told them that they should go to the mountains to find them and bring them back. "If you don't bring them back, we will make you suffer." At that time, the family members were going to search for them with the Chinese soldiers. When they didn't have food to eat, they stole a dzo from a household. After they slaughtered the dzo, the Chinese arrested them, and beat them up and shut them up in a two-story building. The two of them jumped from the roof of the building. When they landed on the floor, they fell unconscious and couldn't get up for about 10 minutes. After that, they ran away to the mountains for good. During that time, they killed quite a lot of Chinese military officers. They didn't kill ordinary soldiers. Later, when their family members were told to go find them, they didn't find them. So the Chinese soldiers went together to search for them. I heard that they could see the Chinese soldiers going down there. Among them there was a pro-Chinese Tibetan who had made him suffer. They were coming quite near to them, so they could have shot him. But they didn't shoot him. Later on, after they surrendered, they told that person that, "We didn't kill you though we could have shot you at that time." He was glad to hear about that and told him, "Actually, I had made you suffer a lot in the past, you could have killed me, but you didn't. This is very good." One day, they were boiling tea in a clearing in the forest near to the road towards the monastery. At that time, a truck full of Chinese came to that place. The Chinese stopped the truck and came up to the place where they were staying. The other person called Shugu Bulu was a little bit nervous and not so brave. So he was trying to touch his gun. At that point, Phurbu Tseden told him not to move. Actually, the Chinese had come to light their cigarettes. The two of them also had Chinese soldiers' clothes to wear and spoke Chinese. So the Chinese soldiers were not attentive thinking that they were Chinese soldiers. After that, when the two of them came down, the announcement had been made saying that whoever could arrest the two of them would be given such and such reward. So when the two of them went to the nomad's place, all the nomads, regardless of gender, were chasing them. At that moment, it was raining, so they had turned their gun upside down and covered it with a raincoat. They told the nomads, "Do you want this?" and pointed the gun at them. Then they ran away. After that, the two of them entered a yak hair ten,t and ate something and took some tsamba, butter and dried cheese, and they also took a horse. Then they stopped at a place called Jamda Dragya, which is quite near to their homeland, and boiled tea. In that place, they saw a group of Chinese hunting.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  Probably, it was in 1957-58. I am not sure about the year. I just heard about this later on from Phurbu Tseden's wife who came here [India]. When the Chinese soldiers saw the two of them when they were hunting, they charged forward towards them and the Chinese military officer charged forward riding a horse. Phurbu Tseden was aggressive and he shot him in his forehead and killed him. After that, they exchanged fire with 10 Chinese soldiers. 1-2 Chinese soldiers were killed and 1-2 wounded, and then the remaining soldiers ran away. Phurbu Tseden's partner was also badly wounded. He gave him the blessed pills (Tib. ཆིནཏེན [བྱིན་རྟེན]) from his amulet because he was going to die. At sunset he died. Phurbu Tseden thought of killing as many Chinese he could kill. He thought it would be good to die because his partner had died and he was alone, where shall he go. He wished the Chinese would come. But the Chinese didn't come. They had hidden the guns and food that they got from the Chinese when they killed them in some places so that they could get them when they needed them. He stayed alone for one year in the rocky mountains, so his complexion became black and he was praying Tara [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] prayers on the mountains. At that time, in the place called De gongma [Tib. སྡེ་གོང་མ], there were 10-15 matchless people, like the rich farmer called Makoliang. Phurbu Tseden met those people and they swore that they would all unite together. After that, when 100-200 Chinese soldiers came to that place, they waited in ambush and killed quite a lot of Chinese, and they got a Jiguan machine gun. At that time, the other nomads didn't know how to shoot the Jiguan. But they had gotten the Jiguan when they drew lots. The nomads gave the two of them the Jiguan and they gave them in return a rifle. In the place called Linga Shingpa, there were two brothers of the household called Bujön. The older brother was holding his younger brother and going up to the mountains. Before that, De gongma and Linga Shingpa had killed each other many times [in revenge], so they were holding a grudge. But they had sworn that since their real enemy was the Chinese, "we will not hold any grudge internally until we finish fighting with the Chinese." Phurbu Tseden and his partner were sitting under a horse skin to protect themselves from the rain and the two brothers of Bujön were staying at a place higher up. However, the people from De gongma were immoral (Tib. མརབ [མ་རབས]) and they planned to kill the two brothers of Bujön, so they told the older brother to come down to discuss something. The older brother was not suspicious of them and went down, but when he got there, the people of De gongma stabbed him to death. After that, they also called the younger brother to come for discussion and when he got down there, he knew that his older brother was killed, but they also stabbed him 12 times. However, before he died he said, "De gongma, you black dogs! (Tib. ཁྱིགེན་ཁྱི་ནག [ཁྱི་རྒན་ཁྱི་ནག]). You reneged on the oath nine times. I never thought you would do that and you killed my brother and now you are killing me. All of you should follow us like sheep and goats going on the bridge" (Tib. ralug sambe gangla 'gro ba nangshin shog a [ར་ལུག་ཟམ་པའི་སྒང་ལ་འགྲོ་བ་ནང་བཞིན་ཤོག་ཨང]), and then he put some earth in his mouth and died."   

**Q:**  What did he mean to come like sheep and goats on the bridge?   

**A:**  He put a spell on them to die after him like sheep and goats coming [one after another] on a bridge. At that point, the people of De gongma might also have planned to kill Phurbu Tseden and his companion, so the two of them were suspicious of them.   

**Q:**  Did they have any grudges against them in the past?   

**A:**  No, they didn't, but De gongma's people told Phurbu Tseden to hand over the Jiguan to them. Phurbu Tseden told them, "We gave you a rifle in exchange for the Jiguan. And where are the two brothers of Bujön? Bring both of them here." Then De gongma said, "The two brothers are staying up there. There is no reason to bring them here."   

**Q:**  They had already killed the brothers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then they said, "We want our Jiguan back, and we will return your rifle." Phurbu Tseden told them, "If you can't show us the two brothers, then come on up and we will give you the Jiguan." So they didn't dare to go up thinking that they knew about the killing of the brothers. After that, Phurbu Tseden told his partner, "We should not go with the people of De gongma. Let's go to our homeland. These people are not good. Probably, they have killed the brothers. Actually, our enemy is the Chinese, but they are just killing people internally." Then they went home. Before that, Phurbu Tseden and his partner were really courageous. Once, when the Chinese were showing a movie in the Chinese Headquarters, they sent people who knew how to buy the tickets and went to watch the movie carrying their pistols. At the beginning, the Chinese didn't notice them. While they were showing the movie, somehow the Chinese got suspicious and when they turned on the light, they shot the light and jumped from the window, and the Chinese couldn't catch them. Later, it was announced that if he surrendered, they wouldn't do anything to him. Later, the people of De gongma came to our homeland, and the Chinese noticed them and surrounded them.   

**Q:**  After you left Litang Monastery, you were not among the people who fought [using] the guerrilla warfare, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This was because you were supposed to go up to Lhasa with Gasi Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was as I told you before.   

**Q:**  You decided to leave and go to Lhasa according to the divination. Did you have any other thoughts at that time?   

**A:**  I thought if I could go to Lhasa, there were many traders there. So we could gather them together and we [could] request weapons from the Dewashung. Probably we could get some arms from the Dewashung and we could fight with the Chinese. We didn't have any plan to go to a foreign country.   

**Q:**  You just thought of fighting in Lhasa and Lhoka. Did you have any thought for fighting in Litang again?   

**A:**  We didn't have any thought to fight in Litang. But Andru Jinda had gone to Tsha Pagshö [Tib. ཚ་བ་དཔའ་ཤོད] to get arms. Yönrupön had sworn (Tib. ཁེལེན [ཁས་ལེན]) in front of his root Guru called Nyero Lama [Tib. ཉེ་རོ་བླ་མ] that he would never leave this monastery and he would fight with the Chinese. In the beginning, he and Dagöbu went out of the monastery, but later he had a thought of coming back and he came back to the monastery. We heard about Yönrupön from the soldiers who had scattered from that place. Later, all of the soldiers from our homeland came up to Lhasa. They also told me about that.   

