#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0227.02: Tape 2  
##  : with Gasitsang, Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང, ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས]  
  
**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** August 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** T. N. Shelling  
**Name:** Gasitsang, Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང, ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 80  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས] was a monk from Litang Monastery who became part of the revolt against the Chinese in Litang. He is the younger brother of Litang Lotse, who was part of the first group of CIA trainees. In this interview, he discusses some of the fighting in Litang and the events after he and his brothers fled from Litang Monastery in 1956. He also discusses how he was left alone by the CIA in Okinawa in 1958 because he had TB when the rest went on to America for training.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0227_02/H_0227_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Then I heard that the Chinese leader left. Among the prisoners, there was a Geshe called Dagan Geshe [Tib. ཟླ་རྒན་དགེ་བཤེས]. Dagöbu [Tib. ཟླ་རྒོད་བུ] wore a turquoise on his neck, so he took off his turquoise and offered it to the Geshe. He told the Geshe, "I am going to die. Please pray for me."   

**Q:**  The Geshe was also a prisoner so was it in the prison when he offered the turquoise?   

**A:**  Yes. After a while, Dagöbu did some prayers and then he died in the prison.   

**Q:**  The Chinese soldiers didn't watch them in the prison and they were allowed to do that [prayers], right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese were just coming for a short time in the prison. They were not coming many times. I forgot to tell you something that happened before the Chinese soldiers surrounded the monastery and when the monastery had surrounded the Chinese building. 13 riders came from Linga Shingpa [Tib. གླིང་ག་ཤིང་པ], a nomadic area. They said that there were many Chinese soldiers in Linga Shingpa and they were coming to Litang as reinforcements.   

**Q:**  Did the riders come to the monastery?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They came to a place near the monastery to deliver the message.   

**Q:**  Did they say that the Chinese soldiers were coming to the farmer's place in Litang?   

**A:**  They were from the nomadic area.   

**Q:**  Did they say that the Chinese were coming in the direction of the Litang monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. The 8 Khamtsen recruited fighters and about 400 of them went to the place called Shera Choga [Tib.?]. I was among them. We left when the day had almost come. At that time, the Chinese soldiers had arrived at the place called Banyag.   

**Q:**  Did you see the Chinese soldiers?   

**A:**  We couldn't see them, but we were going to wait in ambush. We had just received a message that the Chinese were there. At that time, the 13 riders were staying on the plain called Jagthag Thangkha [Tib. ལྕགས་ཐག་ཐང་ག]. When we got there at about daybreak, we saw a rider was going there. I and Chödrön Thubden [Tib. ཆོས་སྒྲོན་ཐུབ་བསྟན], who was from Mala Shingpa [Tib. མ་ལ་ཤིང་པ] and was related to Gyado Thöndrub [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་དོན་གྲུབ], were going together. Before that, I had sold him a horse. He rode a tan colored horse and he was riding beside me so I asked him, "Why didn't you ride the horse I sold you?" He said "It is out of question to ride your horse." That horse was kind of wild. Then when we got to Jagthag Thangkha, Dagöbu made the military assignments (Tib. མགö [དམག་བགོད]), as he was the commander [Tib. དམག་དཔོན] then.   

**Q:**  Was Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན] with you?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. They sent Dagöbu as the commander [Tib. དམག་དཔོན] of 400 soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were they fighting the battle at the monastery?   

**A:**  They were fighting at the monastery. So 400 fighters went to wait to ambush the Chinese soldiers. We heard that 800 Chinese soldiers were coming down from Linga Shingpa. When they made the military assignments, the Mala Shingpa group was assigned to go to the main road where one side was the river and the other side was the mountain. In winter the river was shallow and people could cross it. At that time, everyone wanted to get some guns and ammunition. The people in our group said, "It is too bad if we don't take that place. That will be a loss." When I asked them why, they said, "If we take that place, we can kill a lot of Chinese and we can get a lot of guns." I told them, "We can get guns, but that place is a very important place, so we can't stop the Chinese in that place. The Chinese have automatic machine guns and we have only rifles that hold 5 bullets. The Chinese have bombs and we don't. So the Chinese will kill many of us." Then they said, "You are right." At that time, the people of Shiwa [Tib. ཞི་བ] Khamtsen and Tshogsam [Tib. ཚོགས་བསམ] Khamtsen were assigned to go to this side of the road which ran along the pasture mountain (Tib. pangri [སྤང་རི]). This place was called Banyag. I was in the Tshogsam Khamtsen group. This road was not the main road. The main road had been assigned to the Mala Shingpa fighters. It was a very important road. We had to wait for the Chinese on the mountain pasture. So on that day we boiled tea before daybreak and we were told that we should get to our bunkers at a fixed time.   

**Q:**  Did you build the bunker?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to.   

**Q:**  There weren't any ready-made bunkers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably we arrived at that place at about 10 a.m. After drinking tea, we held a meeting.   

**Q:**  You were waiting on the mountain, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we sent two sentries to watch where the Chinese were coming. They said that the Chinese were in the place called Banyag Thigu [Tib.?]. The eyes of the Chinese had gotten frost-bit so we said "This is the right time [to fight]. They will come along this road and we will fight a good battle." While we were staying in the bunker, day broke and we could see clearly because the place was a plain. But nobody came along, neither the Chinese nor the nomads. After a while, the sun rose and we saw that the 13 riders from Linga Shingpa were coming along. They were yelling and waving their hands to call to us. We went down and met them and asked what happened, they said that the Chinese had already left.   

**Q:**  The Chinese didn't come to the place where you were waiting to ambush them, right?   

**A:**  They had passed while the Mala Shingpa group was drinking tea. They didn't know that the Chinese had passed that way. After they finished drinking tea, only then did they know that the Chinese had gone.   

**Q:**  So, the Chinese didn't come to the place where you were waiting, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They went along the main road. After that, the 13 riders also left and we came back. We had about 15-20 people.   

**Q:**  Were those Chinese soldiers the one's whose eyes had gotten frost-bit   

**A:**  Yes. They had left. When we came back, all of soldiers had also left. We looked at the footprints and we saw there were Chinese footprints from their canvas boots on the main road. At that moment, some of our people were saying, "We shouldn't go along the main road because the Chinese might be waiting to ambush us. We should [take a] detour through the mountains." There was a person called Gombo Thöndrub [Tib. mgon po don gryb]. He said, "What is there to be concerned about?" (Tib. ཧལེཡ་གརེ་ཡོརེ [ཧ་ལས་ཡས་ག་རེ་ཡོད་རེད]). So he rode his horse and went forward. Some of the Chinese were lying down in pits from where gold had [once] been dug out (Tib. སེརཐོང [གསེར་དོང]) and all the other Chinese were on the mountains.   

**Q:**  Could you see the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, we could. But we didn't know for sure whether they were Chinese or Tibetan fighters. We could see some people wearing yellowish clothes going up and down. There were also Chinese on a small hill near by. If we crossed the river and went to the other side, we could see the Chinese hiding in the pits from where gold had been dug out. So we galloped our horses and went over there. It was winter and the pastures were frozen. So my horse slipped on the pasture and fell down. At that moment, the Chinese started shooting Jiguan machine guns at us from the hill.   

**Q:**  Were you alone?   

**A:**  No, all of my partners were galloping their horses together.   

**Q:**  Why did you go there?   

**A:**  We went to seize the small hill.   

**Q:**  When you went to take the hilltop, your horse slipped on the pasture and the Chinese shot you guys, right?   

**A:**  Yes. My horse was good and it stood up right away and we got onto the hill.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese kill your people?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  How many of you people got on the hill?   

**A:**  Probably, there were about 100-200 people who were able to get on to the hill. After that, the Mala Shingpa group thought that if they got on the main road, the Chinese might be waiting for them, so they detoured and went down. At that moment, the Chinese had already got on the mountain and the Mala Shingpa group also got on that mountain, and they were shooting at each other. We were on the hill on this side [the other side]. So our guns couldn't reach the mountain where the Chinese were, but the Chinese Jiguan machine guns could reach our place. At that point, all of our horses got frightened and ran away when they were shooting. My horse also ran away. Some people who were not riders were sent to catch the horses and we climbed up the mountain on foot. We could hear the gunshots of the Chinese and the Tibetan fighters. When we got on the hilltop and looked, we saw that each of the Chinese ammunition loads were attached to a mule. When all of the Chinese were on the mountain, the Tibetans went up the mountain and fought with the Chinese. The Tibetans set the Chinese on fire along the pastures with some kind of bushes. Quite a lot of Chinese soldiers were killed and 10-15 Tibetans were killed in that fighting. When we went across the mountain, we saw that our horses had been caught and they were holding the horses.   

**Q:**  Who held the horses?   

**A:**  Our partners held the horses. Among our people there was a person called Acha Butrug [Tib. ? bu phrug] who had been fighting his entire life. He had good experience in fighting. He said "It is useless for us to stay here. We should go down and boil some tea, and stay overnight in the forest and wait for the Chinese on the road. Tonight, the Chinese will come down from this place."   

**Q:**  If you were to wait for the Chinese, you had to go down from the mountain, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we had arrived near the monastery. Before dawn, we went to the road to wait for the Chinese. There was a stream and the road along there. We could see the road. When we waited for the Chinese, they didn't come and the day broke. The other people said that the Chinese might have left. If we came back directly in the daytime, we had to cross the place where the Chinese were staying so we detoured in the mountains and came back through the place called Ralung [Tib. ར་ལུང] at the north side of the monastery. So we arrived in the monastery. Many Chinese had been killed and 15-20 Tibetans had also been killed when we fought outside the monastery. Thubden's arm was wounded and later he died. This is the part, I forgot to tell you. Now I will continue the talk about going to Lhasa. We told Gasi Lama that it would be better if he went to Lhasa, but he said, "It has been only 6 months since I arrived here so I am not going to Lhasa. There will be no problem for me to stay here. You better go up to Lhasa. There are only two paths for you to take. You should either surrender to the Chinese or join the Tibetan fighters. I [myself] don't need to join the soldiers and the Chinese might not make me suffer." Then I told him, "If you are not going to Lhasa, then we, your brothers are also not going to Lhasa." He said, "No, you shouldn't do that. I will do a divination. If the divination is good, you should go." Then he did the divination and the result was that it was good to go. I told him he should go again, but he still refused and said, "If I am destined to suffer under the Chinese, it won't help even if I go up to Lhasa because the territory within the Indian Dzelep La [Tib. རྫ་ལེབ་ལ] mountain pass had been occupied by the Chinese [Tibet]. If I am not destined to suffer, there would be no problem even if I stay here. You should either go to Lhasa or surrender or go to make war. These are the only options for you guys." At that moment, one of our neighbors called Achog Chönjor [Tib. ཨ་མཆོག་ཆོས་འབྱོར] sent a messenger to us. He was one of the people who had gone to attend the Chinese meeting. He said, "You brothers should come to surrender. I will guarantee that nothing will happen to your lives. You don't need to hand over your best guns. You can just hand over some inferior guns." He was a good person. The Chinese had given him a title and salary, but he didn't know much about the Chinese policy. I don't remember what kind of answer we gave. We didn't go to surrender. Then we decided to go to Lhasa. There were 8 of us when we started to go up.   

**Q:**  These were the 8 people from Litang who came to meet Andru Jinda right?   

**A:**  Yes. We were 5 brothers from the same parents and another cousin called Athon [Tib. ཨ་དོན], plus one of our neighbors.   

**Q:**  One of the 5 brothers was Lotse, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The eldest brother was called Jayan Wöse [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་འོད་ཟེར], the second oldest was Lotse. I was the third, and the fourth was Trinley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས]. The last brother was Loten [Tib. བློ་བསྟན]. Another person was Alo Chönjor [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་འབྱོར]. He had been living with us from childhood.   

**Q:**  He was like an adopted child, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And another person was one of our neighbors called Bönjor Kyenrab [Tib. ? mkhyen rab].   

**Q:**  Were you brothers the first people from Litang to come to Lhasa after the Litang War broke out in the monastery?   

**A:**  In the beginning, we came through Rakhog [Tib. དབྲ་ཁོག], the homeland of Radru Ngawang. At that time, the late older brother of Radru Ngawang named Tsewang Phüntso [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་ཕུན་ཚོགས] was there. We stayed there for about 4-5 days. After that, we didn't come through Ba [Batang] but came through the place called Drosomai. This was after crossing the Upper Yangtze River [the Drichu]. Then we came to the place called Bonti [Tib. ?]. Then we came to Bukhog [Tib. བུ་ཁོག] where the main home of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> was located. We went to see Pandatsang, but the main people of Pandatsang, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱས], were not there. The Chinese had given a title to Panda Tobgye. But two of his sons were there so we gave them some gifts like tea, and they gave us 1-2 loads of fodder and some meat and butter. We had 1-2 loads of coins called Bhakhuang [Tib. ?]. These coins were not used in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was that a Chinese coin?   

**A:**  It has a dragon design on it and Tibetan letters also. It was a Tibetan coin.   

**Q:**  Was it a pure silver coin?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. We requested that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> exchange those coins with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coins.   

**Q:**  Was that coin used in Litang?   

**A:**  Yes, but mostly another kind of coin was used there. We requested <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> to exchange those coins with dayan. We also requested ammunition from Pandatsang and they gave us 20-30 bullets for the Bura rifle. At that time, their son was about 15-16 years old and the steward was the main person in charge. Then when we continued our journey, there weren't any Chinese on the way. When we reached Tsha Pomda [Tib. ཚ་བ་སོམ་མདའ], we saw Chinese and we had a kind of strange uneasy feeling when we saw them.   

**Q:**  You just saw Chinese, but you didn't have any thought of fighting battles, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we didn't fight on the way.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese do anything to you?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. Probably, they thought we were just traders.   

**Q:**  They didn't know that you came from Litang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Actually, it takes 59 days on horseback from Litang to Lhasa, but it took us more than two months to get to Lhasa. We arrived at Lhasa on the 15th of the 5th lunar month, which was Dzamling Jisang's holiday.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1956. We fought the first battle against the Chinese in Litang on the 27th of the 1st lunar month of 1956. We stayed at Andrutsang's house, as we had done in the past. Then Andru Jinda came to see us and we told him about the war in Litang. At that time, they were not to be blamed. All of them were coming to ask about the war in Litang. We reported to Jinda about the war and told him to request the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a> to give us support in arms and we also submitted a petition (Tib. ཉེཤུ [སྙན་ཞུ]).   

**Q:**  Did you submit the petition in the name of you 8 people? There was no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably, Jinda submitted the petition in the name of the people of Litang in general.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any talk regarding the Batang, Litang and Gyaltang [getting together], right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was regarding Litang exclusively. In 1956 when the Dalai Lama went to India, we also went to India for pilgrimage. My brother had left for India before that.   

**Q:**  You just went for pilgrimage and you were not among the 27 people [Andrutsang] sent to India, right?   

**A:**  I was not among the 27 people, but my brother Lotse was among those. Before that, Lotse went to India for trading. He took a few loads of dayan. Lotse bought goods from India and sent them to Lhasa but we didn't get them. They had planned to go abroad to get the training. When we arrived at Kalimpong, they were going with the Dalai Lama [as unofficial bodyguards].   

**Q:**  You went to Kalimpong on your own, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You didn't have any relationship with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and you weren't sent for training right?   

**A:**  Yes. Lotse and 24 other Litang people were sent. When I arrived at Kalimpong, Lotse was going with the Dalai Lama as secret bodyguards. They had already left so I didn't meet him in Kalimpong, Bodhgaya and Varanasi. When I got back to Kalimpong from the pilgrimage in Nepal, Lotse was in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  It was confirmed that they would be going for training, but they hadn't left, right?   

**A:**  Yes, their names were already registered.   

**Q:**  They were ready to leave, right?   

**A:**  No. They didn't know when they were leaving. They were just waiting for the time to leave. I forgot to tell you something. At 10 p.m. on the 30th of the 1st lunar month, guerrilla warfare (Tib. ཇམག [འཇབ་དམག]) was fought against the Chinese building (Tib. གྱཁང [རྒྱ་ཁང]), the prison, the Chinese military officer's residence (Tib. magpön desa [dmag dpon sdod sa] and the Payroll House. At that time, the Commander of the Tibetan soldiers was Deyong Atrin. He had made the military assignments. He arranged for the volunteers to fight from the east, west, north and the south. They fought using guerrilla warfare for about 20 minutes. When they attacked the Chinese from four directions, the Chinese had prepared the bunkers beforehand putting sands in sacks. We didn't destroy the Chinese house, but we destroyed the gate with axes and went inside the house courtyard. When we got to a distance of 10 feet from the house, the Chinese opened fire with machine guns they had set up and they killed many of our soldiers who were nomads.   

**Q:**  Did they fight the battle in the monastery?   

**A:**  No, they fought at the Chinese house located at a distance of 2 miles from the monastery. When the Chinese were about to leave, thinking they couldn't challenge us, then the Chinese spy called Buga delivered a message to the Chinese saying the Tibetan soldiers didn't have much ammunition. Our soldiers saw him going there and later he was caught. They fought the battle against the Chinese house for 4 days and nights, and many of our soldiers were killed.   

**Q:**  How many people were killed?   

**A:**  Probably, 15-20 of our people were killed. but still they couldn't destroy the Chinese house very much. The Tibetan soldiers took over some small Chinese houses. After that, they came back to the monastery. Now, I will continue to talk about the training.   

**Q:**  When were you sent to Okinawa? Was that in 1958?   

**A:**  I had to stay about a year in India after I left Lhasa. And I had to stay 3 months in Gangtok.   

**Q:**  Actually, you were sent to Okinawa from Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, Lotse and Athar were receiving wireless [Hin. tar] communications from America. Probably, Andru Jinda had told the Americans to accept more people for training in guerrilla warfare. So the Americans told them to prepare 40 people. Andru Jinda made the list of people who were going to go for training and he just sent us.   

**Q:**  Were there 40 people?   

**A:**  No, there were 11 people going with me.   

**Q:**  Can you tell the names of the people who were sent with you?   

**A:**  Tsenda Rinchen [Tib.? rin chen], Gombo Tsering [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཚེ་རིང], Gelek [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས], who was a nephew of Radru Ngawang, Thönpa Tempa Wangchen [Tib. བསྟན་པ་དབང་ཆེན], Gyaga Bulu [Tib.?], I just remember the names of these people. Andrutsang was staying in Kalimpong [Gombo Tashi's relative, see below].   

**Q:**  Who sent you from Lhasa?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda Gombo Tashi sent us from Lhasa. Two of his younger brothers, Lodrö Phüntso [tub. blo gros phun tshogs] and Ngawang Phüngyen [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཕུན་རྒྱལ] were in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Were you sent to get military training?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But, you had to stay in Kalimpong for about a year, right?   

**A:**  We had to stay in Gangtok for about 3 months.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Probably, about 3 months. It was a very secret thing.   

**Q:**  After that, were you sent directly to Okinawa. Was that in Japan?   

**A:**  Yes. In Darjeeling, there were quite a lot of people with us. Altogether, we had to stay in India for about a year because the Americans had just told them to get prepared, but they didn't tell them to send the people. Andru sent 40 people right away to India, but they couldn't make the plan for receiving these people right away. Therefore, we had to stay in India. At that time, they [the Americans] had made the connection with Gyalo Thondup. In the beginning, we were supposed to go to America, but later we were sent to Okinawa. We had to have a physical checkup, like x-rays. After that, Gyalo Thondup himself drove the car and we were taken to Siliguri, from where we had to walk to the border of Bangladesh at night. At just about daybreak, we arrived at the border of Bangladesh. At that time, there was only one Pakistan. They showed us the lamp signal and when we got there, there were two Americans and some Pakistani soldiers. After we drank tea, we were driven in jeeps for a couple of hours and then we had to go in a train. At that point, there were 11 of us. Later they received 20 people.   

**Q:**  Did they tell you in Darjeeling that you had some sickness?   

**A:**  Yes. The doctor told me in Darjeeling that I had a little bit of sickness.   

**Q:**  But they sent you Okinawa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After we arrived at Okinawa, we stayed for about 10 days. During that time, they gave us a little bit of training. There were American soldiers in that place. We were brought to the hospital and we had a physical checkup again and they told me that I had TB so I would not be able to get the training for the time being. You had to stay here for awhile, but after your recovery, you could get the training.   

**Q:**  In the meanwhile did you learn how to send wireless messages?   

**A:**  Yes. All of us learned how to send wireless messages, because we didn't have any other work to do. Among us, there was a servant of Andrutsang who was born in Lhoka and whose father was from Minyag [in Kham]. He was the best in learning how to send wireless messages. He could send about 18-19 telegraphs. Rinchen and I could send about 17 telegraphs messages. The people who had a bad memory, could send only 4-5 telegraph messages.   

**Q:**  Was that 18-19 telegraphs sent in an hour or what?   

**A:**  It was sent in a fixed number of minutes.   

**Q:**  You just learned wireless and they didn't train you for jumping from planes, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Except for two of you, did the other people get training?   

**A:**  The other people went to America. When we were in Okinawa. There were three houses kept for the secret people. And there were Japanese police stationed at the gate. The other people were not allowed to enter the gate. The two of us lived on the first floor. When we were there, we saw that they brought our people to the upper floors. We could see them turning on the light. We were brought to Bangladesh in a train and then we had to go in a ship also. We were taken like prisoners and they made us wear white clothing. 5-6 Pakistan soldiers were going ahead and 5-6 soldiers were coming behind us. After crossing the river, we arrived at Dakka. In that place there were about 8-9 American soldiers waiting for us and there was a big hanger for keeping planes.   

**A:**  On the first day, they gave us a down quilt and the bed was made from flat cotton yarn ropes (Tib. སིངཐག [སྲིང་ཐག]). It was winter and the weather was cold, and when I covered myself with the quilt I felt cold underneath. When I put the quilt underneath, I felt cold from the top. The next morning when we were drinking tea, we told them about that. At that time, Andrutsang Ngawang Phüngyen knew about the quilt. He told us, "You are foolish. You should get into it and close the zipper of the quilt [sleeping bag]." We didn't know that. They also gave us strange food. They took out all the organs from the carcass of a sheep or a goat and stuffed rice in it and grilled it. They put it on the table and let us eat. There were about 10 American soldiers. They were very tall and strong and they were playing [in English] cricket. At about daybreak, they took us in a black plane. The plane flew about 40 hours and the plane was making rounds all the time. In the corner of that big plane, they had piled up the loads and the soldiers were playing cards on the loads. They gave us tin food only, and when we looked up, we could only see the sky and when we looked down, we could only see the sea. The plane flew for about 40 hours. The plane landed only once, probably, that place was Thailand. There was a hotel at the head of a village. They told us to sleep for 1-2 hours. You couldn't go out of that place. We could leave only at night. We couldn't sleep because there were planes flying above with a sound "Hua." After that, we were brought in the plane to Tokyo. We were taken in an Army truck with a canvas cover. When we peeped through the canvas we could see the lights of the Japanese markets, and the women were like Chinese. After we arrived at Okinawa, we were brought to the American hospital twice. We stayed about 11 days together. The Americans knew Lotse before that. When I told them that I am his brother, they were glad to hear that and they liked me more than the other people. They told me, "It is good you are the brother of Lotse and you were involved in the Litang War. You should tell us whatever information you have. The Chinese are also our enemy."   

**Q:**  Were there any people who knew your language?   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. yab gzhis drung yik] The &quot;title&quot; of the secretary/clerk of Gyalo Thondup whose personal name was Lhamo Tsering.">Yabshi Trunyi</a> [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་དྲུང་ཡིག] [Lhamo Tsering] was with us.   

**Q:**  Did he know English?   

**A:**  Yes, he knew [English]. He was the interpreter. After that, he went with the other people to America.   

**Q:**  He was your leader, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He spoke English and his Chinese was good. The other people got training for 6 months while the two of us stayed in Okinawa for 6 months. In the beginning, there were two Americans who were serving us food. One of them was wearing glasses and the other was a bald and pockmarked, and had blond hair. We had plenty of food, but later, they served food only once a day. So we had a hard time regarding food when the tin can food ran out. The two of us didn't know the language well and they didn't know Tibetan. One day, I told my partner, "Let alone us working for our nation, there is a danger of dying from starvation." He was a little bit more patient and said, "it will be alright. They might take us to another place." In the beginning, they served food twice a day, but later they served it only once.   

**Q:**  Did they serve quite a lot of food when they served once?   

**A:**  They served us chicken. When they served us twice, we used to throw away the bones of the chicken, but when they served only once, we had to eat the bones also. The bones were soft.   

**Q:**  What did they serve with chicken?   

**A:**  They served some mashed potato and ground meat and some vegetables. We could find some kind of black fungus (Tib. ཆུཤ་མོརོ [Tib. ཆུ་ཤ་མོག་རོ]) in the water in the pastures. We collected them and cooked them. Otherwise, we couldn't find anything, because we couldn't go outside, like prisoners.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay like this?   

**A:**  For 6 months.   

**Q:**  Didn't you tell them that you don't have enough food?   

**A:**  My partner told me not to tell them, but one day, I told the American wearing glasses. However, he didn't understand my language. After that, the pockmarked one came. He was very smart and he used to look everywhere whenever he came. He would also look in the kitchen. There were ants on the stove because there was sugar on the stove. He killed the ants and said that you should kill them. Otherwise, you will get sick. He was speaking English "very bad." After that, the electric stove was not working and the two of us put down three stones and used firewood and boiled tea. Later, they connected the wire for the stove. One day, one of the Americans brought Tharchin Babu's newspaper [Tib. ཐར་ཕྱིན་སྦ་སྦུ] and there were photos of the Dalai Lama on it. We knew that the Tibetan New Year was approaching, but we didn't know the date. So we just guessed the date and collected some juniper and burnt incense to celebrate the New Year. We offered some rice in the bowl they brought us and we also offered water offering and a butter lamp. After that, an American came and saw that we had made the offerings in front of the photo of the Dalai Lama and said in English, "Very good." That person didn't come to see us for a month. One day, we saw about 10 people carrying sickles going near the window. They were clearing the way by cutting the bushes and then we were told to move to another house and bring our things. Then the bald man came down and we met on the way, his legs were hurt somewhere, He told us you don't need to stay here. After we went down, we heard that they were shooting behind the mountain.   

**Q:**  Were they fighting?   

**A:**  They were just doing target shooting.   

**Q:**  Were those American soldiers?   

**A:**  Probably they were Japanese soldiers. In that place there was a forest fire burning and when we went there, the fire had been put out. Among the 11 people, there was a person called Jama Golo [Tib. ?]. He was a smart guy. He told my partner that there was a wall over there and if we crossed the wall, we would reach on the top of the mountain. So we crossed the wall and got on the mountain-top, and from there we saw there was a village down there and we could also see the sea. Then two American soldiers who were driving a jeep and came along, and they were looking at us and pointing their fingers towards us. My partner told me, "Maybe they are talking about the two of us being here. We better go back quickly." Then we went back and the American soldiers also came in. Later, we knew that they were talking about building a road. After that, we told the bald Americans that we didn't have enough food. At first, he was thinking and then he understood us and said [in English], "tomorrow." On the next day, he brought 2 KG of rice, 2 KG of flour, a KG of ground meat, and some mashed potato and vegetables. Then the two of us made Momo. Although we didn't have steamers, we put some bamboo in the pot and boiled the Momo. We were planning to eat Momo on the pasture meadow. Just after that, the bald American came along and there were some other 2-3 people. They looked at our food and said something like [in English] Tibetan food and said "very good." After that, Rinchen Dargye [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དར་རྒྱས], who was from Derge, was brought to the place where we were staying. There was an American captain and the interpreter was called Tashi [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས]. Rinchen Dargye was lame. He was told that he should stay with us. Later, we knew that he was among the 40 people going for training and he was brought to that place because he had a leg problem.   

**Q:**  When the two of you were there, other people going for training also came there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Many people came by. He [Rinchen Dargye] said that they had 40 people and they were at the airport. At that time, Rinchen Dargye was agitated and told the Americans "Why did you bring me here? Am I a Chinese spy?"   

**Q:**  Did he know English?   

**A:**  He spoke through the interpreter. The American captain told him, "You can't get training because you have a leg problem." And they told us, "You should take care of him and supervise him. This person is not so good."   

**Q:**  Was that interpreter, a student from a School in Darjeeling?   

**A:**  When we were in Darjeeling, he was living in Singamari and he taught us some English alphabet. He had been hired by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> before that. The interpreter told us to take care of Rinchen because he was agitated. After that, I told Rinchen Dargye, "You shouldn't show anger to the Americans. We requested them to help us. They didn't request us for the help. The two of us are also similar to you. Our partners went for training but we had to stay because we were sick." After that, Rinchen Dargye did not come with us. When we were cooking, he was going outside. After that, we called him in to eat food and then he told us about how <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> went to Lhoka, and Taiwan had sent a plane for their support, and Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ] was the main person in the Chushigandru. He was praising Jagö Namgyal Dorje very much.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That might be at the end of 1958.   

**Q:**  Tibet was not lost, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  When he arrived there, did you get enough food?   

**A:**  Yes, we were eating together. He said, "There were two people trained in America giving training [in <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>], one of them had a white complexion." We thought that Ngawang Phüngyen might have been dropped in Tibet and he was giving the training. Later, we knew that it was my late brother Lotse who gave the training to all the soldiers in Chushigandru, like firing cannons and using bombs. Rinchen Dargye stayed with us for about 2 months. Then our other partners who went for training came back. There was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. yab gzhis drung yik] The &quot;title&quot; of the secretary/clerk of Gyalo Thondup whose personal name was Lhamo Tsering.">Yabshi Trunyi</a>, Gaden [Tib. དགའ་བསྟན], and Gombo Tseden [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཚེ་བརྟན] with them.   

**Q:**  They were coming back to India after the training was over, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when we were in Okinawa, we practiced sending wireless messages. Sometimes, he sent the telegraph and I wrote it and sometimes, I sent the telegraph and he wrote it. But we couldn't thoroughly learn that.   

**Q:**  Was that telegraph which make the sound "tu tu tu"?   

**A:**  Yes, and there were numbers, but I forgot it. When I arrived back at India, my brothers had arrived there and all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had also arrived. The Dalai Lama had also arrived in India. One day, I went to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. yab gzhis drung yik] The &quot;title&quot; of the secretary/clerk of Gyalo Thondup whose personal name was Lhamo Tsering.">Yabshi Trunyi</a> and asked him whether my brothers had arrived or not. He told me that all of them had arrived. I asked him whether they were in Darjeeling. He said, "They are not in Darjeeling, but don't worry. They are well." The next day, when I went to see Yabshi Trunyi, I met my brother and Athar when they were coming down, and they told me to come to see them in their residence Shishila. Yabshi Trunyi might have been embarrassed because he told me that they were not in Darjeeling. On that evening, I went to see them. After that, at the end of 1959, I went to Kalimpong as my older brother was there.   

