# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0063.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 11 July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 77  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས] was a minor official (clerk) in Shigatse who played a role in the second People's Association in 1955-56 and then joined Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses how he went to Dartsedo as part of the first denshu (welcoming home delegation) for the Dalai Lama in 1955. He also recalls staying in Shigatse Dzong for protection and later being sent to Lhasa and explains how they started the Mimang Tshogpa. He also explains receiving letters from Jenkhentsisum and distributing copies [of a leaflet] during the Mönlam of 1956, and working with Chushigandru in Lhoka.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0063_02/H_0063_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me all about the Mimang Tshogpa.   

**A:**  Tsedor la told me to think about [how I was involved in] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a> welcoming delegation for the Dalai Lama when he came back from China. I was among the 1st denshu. Along with me was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Sey [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་སྲས] and the Katsab Thubden Ramyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས].   

**Q:**  Is that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> who is now in the Political Consultative Conference?   

**A:**  Yes. his name is Ganden Paljor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར]. Those two were government officials. And for the representatives of the three great monasteries, there was the fat abbot of Drepung called Tsulkhang Khembo [Tib. ཚུལ་ཁང་མཁན་པོ].   

**Q:**  Was that the one called Jampa Trinley [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་འཕྲིན་ལས] who died last year or the year before last year in the Political Consultative Conference?   

**A:**  Yes. And there was a Sera abbot, the Töba Khembo, and the Ganden abbot, the Shartse Khembo [Tib. ཤར་རྩེ་མཁན་པོ]. Then among the Mimang Representatives (Tib. thümi [Tib. འཐུས་མི]) there was Alo Chöndze, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Gyetong [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་རྒྱས་སྟོང] who is now in Dharamsala, a Shelkar monk called Ngawang [Tib. ངག་དབང] something. When we arrived at Darstedo, there was a Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ] monk with a beard called Petop [Tib. དཔལ་སྟོབས].   

**Q:**  Did you leave from Lhasa?   

**A:**  We all left from Lhasa. We reported to the Kashag and then went to meet the Dalai Lama.   

**A:**  How far was your plan to go down to meet him?   

**A:**  Our original plan was to go as far as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>. But before we reached there, there was an earthquake so we/he couldn't get through. When we reached Darstedo, we stayed for about a month there. At that time, we didn't wait in Darstedo [until the Dalai Lama's arrival], but instead we said that we are going ahead. When we were there waiting, Alo Chöndze insisted and said, "Let's not wait here." So we went up to Yangan [Ch. ya an]. We arrived there just as the Dalai Lama was arriving and we met him there. Accompanying the Dalai Lama, was Ngabö, Surkhang ans some other officials. Surkhang met us and said, "It's good that you have come here. You will have a chance to meet the Dalai Lama and after that, you should return back to Lhasa right away. The Dalai Lama will be returning to Lhasa, so there is no reason for you to dilly dally around here. You should return to Lhasa." The accommodation arrangements for the Dalai Lama were excellent. We had our audience and then we set out for Dartsedo. We stayed in Dartsedo for one day.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama was coming later on, right?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama was returning basically together with us. At <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>, the Dalai Lama held an audience with us. He said, "You all can go ahead slowly as it would be good for your health. I have to go to Tau Nyertso [Tib. རྟའུ་ཉེར་ཚོ] Monastery and Trango [Tib. བྲག་འགོ]) Monastery. You don't have to go to these places. You can tell the government that you met me here. Then we went back (to Lhasa) right away.   

**Q:**  In Alo Chöndze's book, he wrote a little bit about when the Mimang representatives were in Darstedo that you made connections with the people in Litang and Chantreng and were planning to submit a petition to the government saying that the Chinese should withdraw their soldiers.   

**A:**  When we went from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> to Ralagang [Tib. ར་བླ་སྒང] there were some Litang people already there.   

**Q:**  Is Alo Chöndze from Litang?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, he met the Litang people. All the Litang people came to seek the audience in that place, because it is a long distance for him [Dalai Lama] to go there [to Litang]. So we also stayed there because they served us food and the accommodations were good. At that time, the Dalai Lama gave the audience to the people. Then we didn't go back right away, and we went to Tau Nyertso Monastery. The Dalai Lama went to Datar [Tib. mda' dar ?] Monastery and we were also there. From there, we went ahead.   

**Q:**  Did you return with the government officials and the monk representatives or just the Mimang Tshogpa?   

**A:**  We stayed and travelled kind of together, although <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> and them were government officials and we were the Mimang representatives. Then we arrived in Lhasa and the Dalai Lama also came almost together.   

**Q:**  When you met the Litang Khambas, did you talk about stopping the People's Liberation Army from coming [to Tibet]?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have any talks like that. We had a kind of preparation because at that time, we didn't like the CCP. But we had to be alert because the people would not follow us. So we remained like this. We, the Mimang Tshogpa had an internal plan for not letting the Chinese invite the Dalai Lama, but the people didn't listen to us and basically, the people didn't want to rise up and were dilly dallying about doing anything. Therefore, we couldn't do anything.   

**Q:**  When you returned to Lhasa, what was your plan? Didn't you submit a petition to the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]?   

**A:**  After that, the Mimang Tshogpa held secret meetings and went to submit the petition to the PRC. Alo Chöndze, Lhabju from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and Bumtang Trunyi from Lhoka, these three carried the petition to Yuthok house. They went the first time and we were supposed to go to remind [follow] them. At that time, Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were in Yuthok, but nobody was attentive to us [the first group]. They neither told us [them] to go in nor told us [them] to get out. Alo Chöndze and those people didn't come back, so we planned the second group composed of 15-20 people. So people like Gyethang [Tib. རྒྱས་ཐང] Chandzö, Andru Lama and I were supposed to go with the petition. We thought that the PRC might have arrested them. But when we went there, they were staying in the courtyard of Yuthok and nobody was paying attention to them. They said, "Nobody is paying attention to us and they neither told us to come in nor told us to get out." We also went there, but after awhile we had to go back.   

**Q:**  So you were unable to submit the petition, right?   

**A:**  Yes, nobody received the petition. So we finally left the petition on the stone steps and left. Normally, there was a guard at the gate, but on that day, he wasn't there. [Note MCG: He is incorrect about this and the petition was submitted. The the reader is referred to the interviews with Alo Chöndze (H.0004) for the correct explanation].   

**Q:**  Didn't they ask you like who you are you and what you have come for?   

**A:**  No. On that day there were no guards at the gate and we could go in and out wherever we wanted to.   

**Q:**  Probably, the Chinese knew that you people were going to come because there were many spies, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The PRC would know every internal thing when they did their work. But we just revealed the secret from the beginning. So nobody was attentive to us. Then we went to the Kashag and told them, "We went to submit the petition, but Zhang Jingwu and those people were not attentive to us, so we came to the Kashag. Please support us to submit the petition."   

**Q:**  Did you submit the petition before the Dalai Lama went to India or after that?   

**A:**  This was just after the Dalai Lama returned from China and before he went to India.   

**Q:**  How many points were there in the petition?   

**A:**  There were 3-4 points in it, but I don't recall well. Probably, there might be some copies among Alo Chöndze's documents.   

**Q:**  Yes, there are, but it is difficult to read. The petition that was submitted to the Dalai Lama was written clearly, but the petition you submitted to the Chinese is not clear.   

**A:**  Alo Chöndze had a lot of documents. I had a lot of documents, but they were all ripped up. I had a photo of the Dalai Lama writing his arrival note when he arrived in China and Ngabö was near him, but this morning I found that these were all ripped up. When Alo Chöndze, Lhabju and Bumtang Trunyi were under arrest in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] 1. A major open market in Lhasa in the traditional era that was near the Jokhang and traditionally sold miscellaneous foodstuffs and new and old goods. 2. The location of the of the Police Regiment, which was also sometimes called the Tromsikang Regiment.">Tromsikang</a> [Tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] Regiment, in Shigatse, people said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> (Labrang Gyentsen Thombo [Tib. བླ་བྲང་རྒྱལ་མཚན་མཐོན་པོ]) is great and people like Bisu and Lhabju wrongly submitted a petition that will harm the unity [between Chinese and Tibetans]. Then the Tashilhunpo monks boasted a lot and said, "We must annihilate/destroy Bisu."   

**Q:**  At that time, did they stick up posters about this in the market?   

**A:**  Yes. They not only stuck up posters, they were also yelling this in the marketplace. So we thought if they would act rashly, it won't be good for us, so we stayed in the [Shigatse] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> (for protection). At that time, the dzong head was Chabtsom [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ] [Note MCG: His interview is H.0008] and the governor of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, the Tsangji was Mengyiling [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང], who was a very knowledgeable person. So we thought that he would cover (protect) us and we stayed in the dzong. Consequently, nothing happened to us at that time. Otherwise, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> monks were saying that they are going to do something very serious to us.   

**A:**  Did they say that they are going to oppose you?   

**A:**  Yes. I am a Gelugpa [follower] and my lama was Phabongkha, so naturally, I would have that [faith] in Trijang Rimpoche [whose teacher was Phabongkha]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> was a very good monastery, so I would go for a circumambulation every day around the monastery. But after that, I would go to the office in the dzong. At that time, they said that Bisu is terrible [Tib. གང་མིན་ཚད] and made the situation unsafe for me. But the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་སྤྱི] The governor of the Tsang area. He was headquartered in Shigatse.">Tsangji</a> was Mengyiling, so we had the confidence that he would not let them succeed and we stayed in the dzong.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay there?   

**A:**  We stayed there for a little more than a month. After this, when the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama went to India. Lhabju was taken to Lhasa and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Kyilma was with us, but it didn't seem right to stay like in detention in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. Then the Dalai Lama came to the dzong when he was going to India and he was supposed to give religious teaching in Shigatse. By that time, Panchen Lama must have given the Kalachakra Initiation. At this time, Phala Drönyerchemmo gave me the order that I have to go to Lhasa and Liushar was also there. I was kind of stupidly stubborn and I said, "I am not going to Lhasa, I don't have anyplace to go other than Shigatse, no matter whether I will be killed or cut into pieces". Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་སྤྱི] The governor of the Tsang area. He was headquartered in Shigatse.">Tsangji</a> Mengyiling, who was person in charge of the accommodations, acted kind of tactfully and said, "You have to go to Serdogjen [Tib. གསེར་མདོག་ཅན] [on the way to Shigatse] to make the accommodation arrangements for the Dalai Lama's visit. So I went there. When I arrived at Serdogjen, Mengyiling said, "You have to go down [to Lhasa]. Otherwise, if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> monks beat you up in a rash manner, it would be useless. So you should go to Lhasa by car." He sent me in his servant's car. That's how I came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  This was in 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you first meet Alo Chöndze?   

**A:**  I was among the people who first internally started the organization and Shelkar Chandzö Lobsang Dorje was also there. Alo Chöndze didn’t dare to set up the Tshogpa right away. At this time, the people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> burned incense (Tib. sangsöl [བསངས་གསོལ]) when the Dalai Lama was there. Although we gathered many people there, the Central Committee [Chinese] didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  When did this happen?   

**A:**  This was in 1956. Then we came to Lhasa and we said that it would be good to start one [an organization] in Lhasa. We had started one in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and nothing happened [by the Chinese to us] so why don't we start it in Lhasa. So we made internal preparations for setting up the Mimang Tshogpa. In the beginning, we just had a religious organization for worshipping deities called the Lhapsö Chödrog [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ་ཆོས་གྲོགས]. In this first group, there was the father of Tshatrutsang [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང] and Phala's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> Pelgong [Tib. སྤེལ་གོང]. At this time, Alo Chöndze was kind of famous, so people said that Alo Chöndze should be in the Tshogpa. We said if he comes to the Tshogpa, we should be careful. Then Alo Chöndze said that we should act show-offish and he said, "First I need a motorcycle." How could we get a motorcycle? [laughter]. But at that time Doctor Anan had a motorcycle and he gave it to Alo Chöndze when he had to go out. Then we talked and said we have to have an audience with the Dalai Lama. So we went to the Drönyerchemmo to ask for an audience. He said, "No, it won't be good if Alo Chöndze comes and reports some reckless things. So I will not grant you the audience." Then we had discussions about needing a seal [for the organization]. So I went to see the boss of Andrutsang [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང] who had a long hair and told him, "We have set up the Tshogpa and we are trying to gain Tibet's independence." He said, "I am afraid you wont be able to set up a Tshogpa. Who are the members of the Tshogpa? Then we said that we have Alo Chöndze and Andru Gombo Tashi. Then he said, "Alo Chöndze can't be the leader of the mimang." When I asked him why, he said, "It's because he has round eyes like that of an animal." In the past, he used to belonged to Andrutsang, but Andru Gendün gave alms and tea to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> and became famous [MCG: unclear]. So Andru Gombo Tashi is someone who will ruin [Tib. བྲགས་བརླགས་སྡེར་སྡེར] Andrutsang [?by giving too many alms]. We should not have any hope in him. So Alo Chöndze can't be the leader and Andru Gombo Tashi also can't be the leader." Then he asked us, "Who else is there in the Tshogpa? I said there is also the Tsawarongpa Dampa Lodrö [Tib. དམ་པ་བློ་གྲོས]. Then some of us introduced me to him saying he is the clerk of Shigatse Dzong. And he told me, "You can be one of the members, and there were 15-20 people in it and he said such and such is okay. Just these two people are not good. This is just what Andrutsang said, so we couldn't count on that and we told Alo Chöndze to be the person in charge. Alo Chöndze squandered a lot of money. For example, the Tibetan Government gave him some money internally. Once I went to visit <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] and he told me, "You people will get a sum of money. You should ask Alo Chöndze about this." After a week when I asked him, he had already squandered it all. But since he had a big name, so we needed him in the Tshogpa and I didn't tell anyone about this. All the people worked hard and set up the Mimang Tshogpa. Normally, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders would go to burn incense at the place where the birth deity of 14th Dalai Lama is placed on the birthday of the Dalai Lama. This place was called Trunglha Yasö [Tib. འཁྲུང་ལྷ་དབྱར་གསོལ]. This was like a day when the Litang Khambas burned incense and worshiped the deities, and the ordinary people would not go there and burn incense. It was not a masses' celebration. [On that day], the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> would throw a party and invite the Kashag. [Note by Shelling: The lay officials above the senampa were also invited to the party] But, in that year, me and a person called Böba Dorje [Tib. བོད་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ] who is from Tö, went for the Trunglha Yaso riding horses with the Khambas. Since then, we established the Mimang Tshogpa and started shouting slogans, but later we didn't achieve anything. Actually, we wouldn't be able to achieve anything.   

**A:**  When did this start? Was that before the Dalai Lama went to China?   

**A:**  This was after he went to India.   

**Q:**  Didn't you set up the Mimang Tshogpa before the Dalai Lama went to China?   

**A:**  It was before Dalai Lama went to China, there was a Lhabpö Chödrog founded where we collected donations for the golden throne. [Note MCG: He is confused. The golden throne was in 1957 after the Dalai Lama returned from India]   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  I don’t know when this was. Probably it was in 1951-52   

**Q:**  Was your organization called Mimang Tshogpa or Tsondu?   

**A:**  It was called Mimang Thütsog [Tib. མི་དམངས་འཐུས་ཚོགས], but it was not made by the people in general. The people were scared of it. Now people are saying, "It would be very good if the PRC would keep on the policy that they had started from the beginning. If you say that Tibet is independent, in the future it won't be good." The people are paying attention to the Mimang Tshogpa. Later, Bumtang Trunyi, Lhabju and Alo Chöndze submitted a petition. Later, Lhabju died in jail in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] 1. A major open market in Lhasa in the traditional era that was near the Jokhang and traditionally sold miscellaneous foodstuffs and new and old goods. 2. The location of the of the Police Regiment, which was also sometimes called the Tromsikang Regiment.">Tromsikang</a>, and Bumtang was released, but later he couldn't do anything. In the past, he was regarded highly, but later he held a point of view which was against the PRC, but people didn't pay attention to him.   

**Q:**  How many people were in your organization and where did you meet? Didn't you need a house to meet?   

**A:**  There was no fixed place. We met wherever it was convenient at the time. We met several times at Alo Chöndze's Songra [Tib. ཟོང་ར] House in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street, and sometimes we met in the parks. W,hen other people were around we played mahjong, but when we were alone, we discussed politics. We thought that we don't care even if we would die.   

**Q:**  How did you fund the organization and who were the leaders, the secretary or the staff, etc.   

**A:**  We didn't have any money. Pelgong Chandzö was a kind of secretary, and he made the petition. At that time, we didn't dare to make documents and keep money and those things.   

**Q:**  You were doing things surreptitiously, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Mimang Tshogpa got some of the things that belonged to Gen Lamey [Tib. rgan bla med. Is that true?   

**A:**  No. We had nothing to do with that and Gen Lamey did not pay any attention to us.   

**Q:**  After his death, I heard that there was trouble regarding his possessions.   

**A:**  Yes, there were lot of problems. At first, there was a person who said that he will help us, but later he didn't help us.   

**Q:**  Was that his relative?   

**A:**  No. when the CCP wasn't well established, there were lots of people rushing forward. And when the CCP asked a few people, then all people were extremely scared and were not working [for the Mimang Tshogpa] [Note MCG: meaning unclear]   

**Q:**  How did you discuss what points to make in the petition?   

**A:**  The main person who made the petition was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of the Jigyab Khembo who was nicknamed "Seven Generations" (Tib. mirab dünpa [Tib. མི་རབས་བདུན་པ]). Later he was arrested. Anyway, people won't know who made the petition.   

**Q:**  Did you pass around a draft of it to the members and ask their opinions?   

**A:**  [laughs] No. When it was read, people were afraid and they would just say that they had a made a very good one.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that the main point of the petition was that the People's Liberation Army should be withdrawn from Tibet. Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were points like that. They wrote a lot of words which were repeated many times. Actually, there were only 3-4 points that should be told to the PRC.   

**Q:**  Did you ever get an answer from the Kashag?   

**A:**  No, they were not attentive at all.   

**Q:**  In the 4th volume of the history book written by a person called Sejang from Shigatse, he says that Surkhang, Phala Drönyerchemmo, Liushar and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> were supporting the Mimang Tsondu from behind and when Lhabju and Alo Chöndze and you stayed in Lhasa, you people visited them frequently?   

**A:**  That person is called Sejang Tsewang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. སྲད་བྱང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. He was a clerk of the Shigatse Dzong. No, it's not true. Sejang and I were the same, we were clerks. At that time, the late Lhabju came down and I came to Lhasa to participate in a case between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and the government. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Kyilma was sent down to Lhasa. Sejang and those people didn't have any relations. Sejang must have thought I was dead in India and might have said that It was a lie. When I first came here, one day, I met Sejang on the road and he was showing the appearance of being happy and said, "It is good that [you came back]." I said, "Because you have to stay under the PRC, you might have to do that. Otherwise, in the 5th or 6th book, you told a very big lie, but I'm not going to inquire about this. At that time, you had to say that because of the PRC, otherwise, I don't think you will say that to me. If you have time, it would be good if you come to my house to talk about it." But he didn't come. Since we came back from India, they were instigating a lot from India saying the Bisu went back and he is terrible [Tib. གང་མིན་ཚད] as if I had said a lot of inappropriate things. Yes, I did say inappropriate things to the Dalai Lama and I offered him the book before I left. I tried my best to distribute the books and I distrusted several thousands of my book. I also took some books here. I don't have anything to keep secret. They were saying Bisu is very bad and the running dog of the Chinese. Actually, how can I be a running dog of the Chinese. But I criticized the Dalai Lama based on facts and told him. "You shouldn't act and say things wantonly. It is not good for you to say those things. If you say that, people won't have faith in you." I told this to the Dalai Lama in person. The Tibetan Government doesn't have any better people. The best is Surkhang. The Dalai Lama himself said that Surkhang is a person who will harm Tibet. So we should oppose Surkhang." In the past, Gyalo Thondup used to drive students back and forth and he didn't have any knowledge. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> made him like this because Shakabpa is a great liar and he called him the Great noble son [Tib. ལྷ་སྲས་ཆེན་པོ]. The Dalai Lama also listened to him. When they opposed Surkhang, I told the Dalai Lama, "This is absolutely wrong because Surkhang and Ngabö are the best and Surkhang is matchless. If you say that Surkhang is wrong, the Tibetan people won't like it."   

**Q:**  Why didn't he like him [Surkhang]?   

**A:**  This was done by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and he wrote the history book and collected money and did a lot. We were thinking and hoping that Surkhang would do something. When the Dalai Lama crossed the Magola mountain pass and arrived at Missamari. He became like he was not the previous Dalai Lama. Before that, he was a very good lama. I don't know why. At that time, we were living in Missamari, Surkhang came for an inspection. Since I trusted him, I asked him, "Now, our work is done like a large empty sack which looks great, but in reality is broken [Tib. རྒྱ་ཆེ་སྒྱེ་སྟོང]. What are the consequence? He thought for awhile and said,"You are right. Now, we have no hope. But, don't tell this to other people." Then I said, "If there is no hope, then what shall we do." And he said, "If I look at the long run future, probably, it would be good if we would do like Israel. Otherwise,there is no hope." Then I told him, "We regard Surkhang and Ngabö the best like a yolk of eggs [Tib. ཨ་ཡོད་ནང་གི་ད་ཡོད། སྒོ་ངའི་ནང་གི་སེར་རིལ]. Ngabö is left there and if you say what shall we do? Now, it is finished." Surkhang said, "Now there is nothing. We neither have the power nor the strategy. Gyalo Thondup will work." Then I told him, "I know that Gyalo Thondup doesn't have knowledge. He was driving kids back and forth. So what shall we do?" He said, "Shakabpa is okay, but I don't think he can accomplish such great work. Now, there are just Shakabpa and Gyalo Thondup. I am working hard, but I can't do much. Don't tell other people about this." Then I lost hope for the Tibetan cause. I told the Dalai Lama many times, "Without Surkhang, we can't work out anything. Ngabö is good, but he can't do trickery, outrageous audacity and lying [Tib. གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ཁྲམ་གསུམ] like Surkhang." But the Dalai Lama just got agitated. I also told the late Khentsab Lobsang Samden. Once in Kalimpong, Khentsab gave me a bunch of money and said,"I will give you this money. Don't say reckless things to other people." I said, "I didn't say anything to other people. What is going on? I don't want the money. I can beg for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, but the Tibetan issue has become like a large empty sack. If you don't get along well with Surkhang, then you can't achieve anything." When I told the Dalai Lama many times what I mentioned above, he didn't say any bad things to me.   

**Q:**  Tell us about the letters Gyalo Thondup and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> sent you from India for the Mimang Tshogpa? When did they send the letter?   

**A:**  At that time, we regarded them very highly. They called themselves the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and said, "You have to oppose the Chinese." They also sent letters to the Kashag. At that time, the Gadrung was named Dumra [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར] and he said, "We do not dare to submit this kind of a letter whose purpose is to instigate the people to fight and is meaningless." Then we distributed a lot of copies of this letter surreptitiously in Lhasa because people didn't dare to read the letter. This was just after the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  How did they make the connection with you? Did they send the letters through other people?   

**A:**  Yes, the one who carried the letters from India was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> monk called Chindro [Tib. ཕྱི་འགྲོ] which means the person who goes out to do something. At that time, we had a great hope that we will get help from the UN, but the Tibetan Government didn't pay any attention at all.   

**Q:**  Was that before the Dalai Lama went to China or what? At that time, had they demoted the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>?   

**A:**  At that time, they hadn't demoted the sitsab. It was when they were just about to demote them.   

**Q:**  After that, did you send letters back and forth?   

**A:**  Yes, they sent a few letters, but people didn't dare to get involved in this.   

**Q:**  Did you hope that America would help?   

**A:**  Yes, it was said that they depended on help from America, but they [America] couldn't help us in the long run. If we did our work depending on America, that is wrong and it was a fault because America will do their business with whoever would make them have more profit.   

**Q:**  I am doing research on this trying to find out what they were thinking at that time, but now I don't know.   

**A:**  At that time, they couldn't take care of that letter and send the answer. Later, Gyalo Thondup sent us private letters which were signed. I considered it great to receive a letter from him and I also took a letter to India. I should have sent an acknowledging letter to Gyalo Thondup, but at that time I didn't dare to send it because there was too much talk.   

**Q:**  The Mimang Tshogpa was set up when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have any connections with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>?   

**A:**  At that time, Sitsab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and Andrutsang Gombo Tashi pretended [Tib. ཁུལ] to have relations. The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> said all kinds of reckless things to the PRC without any hesitation. Therefore, when they were demoted and the situation became more tense, we were worried that we would be arrested at the same time. Before that, we also sent a letter to America, to Eisenhower.   

**Q:**  Who sent this letter?   

**A:**  We sent the letter from here thinking that it would be great if we sent a letter. Later, we also met Eisenhower after we came to India. We gave him a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> chupa.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  Probably, this was in 1957. [Note MCG: It was in December 1959]  

**Q:**  At that time, had the Dalai Lama come back from India?   

**A:**  This was after he had fled to India.   

**Q:**  This was after the revolt, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did Eisenhower say?   

**A:**  He didn't meet us. We did a lot and said that we want to meet Eisenhower, but he didn't meet us. We just offered him a Tibetan dress and we were supposed to tell him to support us and we didn't have anybody other than America to ask for help. We went to Delhi to meet him but the Indian government didn't allow us to make a move because they thought we will yell and do those things and they had set up many spies.   

**Q:**  What happened leading to Alo Chöndze being arrested, and about the throwing of posters in the Mönlam?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> sent us a letter through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> monk and we then distributed the copies of these letters in the assembly of Mönlam. It was already printed up in India, so we just had to distribute them.   

**Q:**  What did they write in the letter about opposing the Chinese?   

**A:**  It was said, "We should expel the Chinese from Tibet and we shouldn't leave even one Chinese in Tibet. We should fight even if the men were exhausted and only women would be left."   

**Q:**  Were you in Lhasa then?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were not arrested, right?   

**A:**  At that time I wasn't a representative, but I also went to throw the letters.   

**Q:**  How were the letters distributed?   

**A:**  I was actually dressed in a monk's robe and wore the cloak over my head and carried the letters under the cloak and threw them.   

**Q:**  How many copies did you throw out altogether?   

**A:**  About 200 copies.   

**Q:**  Did you throw them one by one or you threw them in bunches?   

**A:**  The letters were made into bunches when we received them and we just threw them. I thought that it would be great if we threw the letters.   

**Q:**  What [benefit] would you get by throwing the letters?   

**Q:**  The letters were from the Jenkhentsisum.   

**Q:**  Did they sign the letter?   

**A:**  No, but at the end of letter, it was said that it is sent by the Jenkhentsisum.   

**Q:**  Did they write in the letter, that a foreign country will help you?   

**A:**  We were told that the U.S. was going to help Tibet, but when we came to Lhoka, Athar and Lhotse were sending wireless to the US CIA, but the American Government was not attentive to us. When we sent them information that Tibetan is lost, the US responded by telling us to try to take over <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>. Actually, we couldn't take over Yadong and we lost the place.   

**Q:**  During the revolt, you were in Lhoka and you sent the wireless message, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Athar and Lotse are still alive in Dharamsala. Both of them were from Litang. The US CIA helped us the most. We also had relations with the Indian Intelligence Agency.   

**Q:**  Did Indian Intelligence help you?   

**A:**  Yes, the Indian Intelligence Office sent people to jump from planes. We made a lot of relations with the Indian Intelligence and the Indians were strange. They would not know the person. They just told us to see such and such a leader.   

**Q:**  Was this after the revolt?   

**A:**  Yes, this was after we came to India.   

**Q:**  Nehru didn't help Tibet, right?   

**A:**  When we were at Missamari, Nehru said, "I have sent orders to help you well." When he talked about Tibetan Independence, he said, "Tibet can't get independence. Tibet is a part of China and it can [only] get autonomy." Like this he was attentive to us. At that time, Nehru was bad. There were many parties in India and some of them like Aja Depa [?] supported Tibet. When things come to a critical point, they will have solidarity with us. Otherwise, there were too many parties in India.   

**Q:**  After the three members of the Mimang Tshogpa were arrested after the Mönlam, did you join <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  I was sent as a representative and I was working here and then I joined Chushigandru. When I arrived in Lhoka, I was among the main leaders.   

**Q:**  Was the Mimang Tshogpa and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> the same or different?   

**A:**  It was same, but the people in ü and tsang weren't involved in it [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>]. But I went to Chushigandru and I was supposed to be great. I was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Jola [Tib. གཙང་པ་ཇོ་ལགས]. I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and also the clerk of the Headquarter and I was in charge of receiving things from the supporters [Tib. རོགས་རམ་ཚོགས་པ]. I collected barley from the people. If soldiers wanted leave, I had the authority to grant them a leave. At that time, I thought it would be great in the future.   

**Q:**  How long did you do this?   

**A:**  A few months. I stayed mostly in Lhoka. I stayed in E Lhagyari [Tib. ཨེ་ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]'s Yarlung Phodrang [Tib. ཡར་ལུང་ཕོ་བྲང]. We weren't friendly with the Khambas because they were always rash. They would say that they didn't care whatever the result would be. When I told them you should not do this, they would say we should do this and we don't care even it doesn't work out.   

**Q:**  They didn't have a plan for the long run future, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They had no plans.   

**Q:**  I heard this from the Chinese captain who joined Chushigandru.   

**A:**  Yes, he was called Lobsang Tashi. Probably he died.   

**Q:**  It was in 1965, when I met him. What did you do from 1957-59 after the Dalai Lama said that the Mimang Tshogpa was illegal and had to be disbanded.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama didn't say that we should dismantle the Mimang Tshogpa. He just said that we should do new work in India.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama came back from India and said you should not hold the Mimang Tshogpa, after that what did you do?   

**A:**  At that time, I was a clerk in Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and then I went with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and then I came to India. In Missamari, Drönyerchemmo and Surkhang were there and Surkhang told me, "You should do some work that is not very hard. Otherwise, you can't achieve anything." Then I got sick from hot weather and went to Kalimpong and I was told to be the People's Deputy of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> and I stayed there for three years. Then I went to Dharamsala and worked in the Home Office. Finally I went to the settlement.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to China, Mao said Tibet does not need to have the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] and that instead Tibet should set up the Tibet Autonomous Region. What did Mimang representatives think about this? Did you think that was good or bad?   

**A:**  We considered the Tibet Autonomous Region was not good and thought of going to India. In our Mimang Tshogpa, we only thought of gradually getting independence and that we will win the victory. We just had stupid confidence.   

**Q:**  Alo Chöndze says in his book that he sent a telegram to Litangbas to revolt when he knew that the Chinese will not withdraw their troops from Tibet. Then the Litang people revolted. It was also said that when you people met the Dalai Lama in Kham, they had prepared for that and then Alo Chöndze said first we are going to Lhasa and try our best to make the Chinese troops to withdraw. If this works out, we won't need to revolt. If this doesn't work out, then you had better launch the revolt.   

**A:**  It was probably true that Alo Chöndze had connections with Litang, but I don't know anything about this specifically. Alo Chöndze says a lot of things that he did, but actually, he didn't do them.   

**Q:**  Who were the main pro-Chinese in the Kashag and among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, and who were for the independence? You don't need to talk about Ngabö because it is clear. What about the other ones like Yuthok, Shasur, Liushar and there was Tsögo.   

**A:**  Tsipön Tsögo was regarded as pro-Chinese, but otherwise he was a capable person.   

**Q:**  And there was also Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན]. Probably he was also pro-Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Who is Janglojen? He escaped to India in the old society. Later, he came back with Kujar [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར] and Kujar worked in the granary office. It's been a long time so I don't remember many things clearly anymore. Nowadays, people are going to do the Trungla Yarsö to celebrate the Dalai Lama's birthday and they are shouting. Actually, they don't need to go there. Since the 7th Dalai Lama was born in Litang, it became the Litang people's ceremony for worshipping the birth deity of the Dalai Lama in Trungla. Some people shouted the slogan, "Tibet is Independence" during the Mönlam and hit people with stones and they also had to put in the statue of Buddha Matriya which was usually brought around the Barkor. Our people are so stupid that they hit people with stones when people were doing good things. I am worried that one day these people will be punished. Even now, the nomads and farmers are staying relaxed [not involved in the disturbance]. You are writing a book, but they won't welcome it saying that this is also something done by the Chinese or you got some money or whatever.   

**Q:**  Would you introduce me to some other people who can tell me about history?   

**A:**  One would be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> who is a nice and stable man who would try not to get other people offended and he knows about the history, but he said something like it was not good that Shatra had signed the Simla Treaty, so probably the PRC didn't like it. Another one would be Chabtsom, but he is a very cautious person and he will try his best not to tell things.   

**Q:**  I know Shatra. I met him in India.   

**A:**  The most frank person is your friend Tsedor La [he means Tashi Tsering]. He had 7 loads of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> when he went to India to study in 1957. He didn't have a thought of Tibetan Independence and he didn't have relations with the Dalai Lama. Probably, he didn't come to Dharamsala at all. Now I am 77 years. Otherwise, I had a good memory.   

