# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0063.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** September 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས] was a minor official (clerk) in Shigatse who played a role in the second People's Association in 1955-56 and then joined Chushigandru. In this interview, he talks about the Reform Assembly of the Tibetan Government and the role played by the monastic representatives who participated in it. He also talks about the first and second People's Associations, and the arrest/detention of its three leaders in 1956. He discusses how Jenkhentsisum were sending letters to Tibet, and his role in throwing leaflets in the Mönlam Prayer Assembly Meeting of 1956. He also comments on Trijang Rimpoche, the Dalai Lama and the controversy over Shungden.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0063_01/H_0063_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  After the People's Liberation Army came to Tibet, there was a system called shungdzin phumpa silu [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན་བུམ་པ་སིབ་བླུག] in the monasteries took back estates that had been leased out in the past. And there was also the Reform Office [Tib. legjö]. Was that an office of the Tibetan Government or the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region? And what kind of relations did it have with the monasteries?   

**A:**  The shungdzin phumpa silu was done, but it didn't work out well and it couldn't do anything to help the monks, the people and the government.   

**Q:**  What was the aim of this?   

**A:**  The aim was to make the Tibetan Government, the religion and the people become better. Before that, all of the chöshi (estates) of the monasteries belonged to the labrang and the tratsang and they didn't benefit the monks who came from afar (Tib. tragyün) and the ordinary monks; they didn't even have food to eat. So the shungdzin phumpa silu was to take back these estates from those [who had leased them]. At that time, the estates that belonged to the government which also were managed by the government. Via shungdzin, the government got a good income. This was done by the Legjö Office in which the drungtsi took the main responsibility, but this also didn't work out. The monastic officials thought that this would harm the income of the labrang and tratsang, so they wouldn't implement the shungdzin well.   

**Q:**  Did the Legjö Office start the shungdzin or who did that?   

**A:**  It was done by the Legjö Office.   

**Q:**  When did this start? Was it before the Chinese arrival or later? Did they start right after the Chinese came or a few years later?   

**A:**  The Legjö Office was started after the Chinese came. At that time, the PRC said that it would be good if the Tibetans could do their own internal reforms. So the Legjö was done by the Tibetans themselves. They made many plans for reforms, but they didn't work out well and it became like the proverb, "A wooden saw can't cut wood." [Tib. ཤིང་སོག་ཤིང་ལ་མི་འགྲོ] and the Legjö remained like it sort of could and could not succeed [Tib. ཁུངས་འཁྱོལ་ལ་མ་འཁྱོལ].   

**Q:**  At this time, who was the head of the Legjö.   

**A:**  It was Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] Drunyichemmo and Tsipön Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང]. Under them was the Larger Intermediate Assembly [Tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ]. There were many kinds of representatives in this meeting including Kundeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Dzasa. The power was with the drungtsi.   

**Q:**  Was this under the Tibetan Government or the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region?   

**A:**  It was a Tibetan Government office.   

**Q:**  Was there any connection with the monasteries?   

**A:**  Yes, the abbots of the three great monasteries were there.   

**Q:**  Were all the abbots there?   

**A:**  Yes, there were the abbots from all the three great monasteries.   

**Q:**  I don't think the abbots from all the tratsang were there?   

**A:**  Probably, there was the abbot of Drepung Loseling and the abbot of Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] who had a scar on his face and from Sera there were the abbots like the Töpa [Tib. སྟོད་པ] Khembo and also the Gyepa [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] Khembo [from Drepung]. And there were the abbots and additional representatives from Ganden like Lobsang Dawa [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཟླ་བ].   

**Q:**  In the past, there were also [monk] representatives in the Large Assembly [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས], right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were the representative from Ganden who was nicknamed "Field Mouse" (Tib. ཨཱབྲ་ལ [Tib. ཨ་བྲ་ལགས]).   

**Q:**  Was the main idea of the Legjö Office to take back the estates that had been leased by the monasteries to aristocratic families?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Local Government also did the shungdzin for all the dzongs and estates and they paid salary to the officials, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did they pay the salary? Was it after the Dalai Lama came back from India or before that?   

**A:**  This happened before the Dalai Lama went to China [1954]. From earlier times, the Central Committee said that we will not interfere and the local [government] has the power. So you have do the reforms. If you can't do it, then we will help you. But they didn't do anything beneficial for the people. All the things they did were wrong and unfair.   

**Q:**  You are right. They didn't do any major reforms.   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't do any major reforms. Ngabö had the desire to make reforms from the root. At that time, Tsögo Tsipön told me, "Now, if they want to do the reforms, go ahead. I have three loads of land tenure documents and I am not going to keep them. I am going to offer them to the government."   

**Q:**  At that time, what was the standpoint of the other Sawang?   

**A:**  The standpoint of the others was just passing the time. They could not do the reforms and at that time they had their property as before,and they were just passing the time thinking I don't care. At that time, Ragashag Sawang was there.   

**Q:**  Yuthok was there, right?   

**A:**  Yuthok was appointed later on. Yuthok was a nice person and was straight-forward. The main person was Surkhang and there was also Ramba.   

**Q:**  Yuthok stayed one year in Kalimpong and he didn't go back right away in 1951. Shungdzin didn't work well in the monasteries because the abbots, the chandzö and the monastic officials had lined up and gathered together and they were embezzling. So it [these estate] didn't help the monks.   

**Q:**  There were many old loans which caused the people to have a hard time. Did they do anything about exempting the old loans?   

**A:**  Do you mean in the monastery or monks?   

**Q:**  Whoever it is. I mean in general for the people who had taken the loans 20 years ago. Did they make any reform on exempting loans?   

**A:**  After the Communists came up from Chamdo, they gave the people human rights and happiness and they just said that they are going to abolish all the loans, but they weren't able to put this into practice.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the government's assemblies, the monk representatives were powerful, but when I looked into the actual situation in the monastery, it seemed to me that the monks were just interested in their salary and alms and not much interested in power. Is that true?   

**A:**  In the tsondu of the Tibetan Government, the three great monasteries had a lot of power and they would obstruct the reforms saying that if the reforms are implemented it will harm the religion. And if you have to do the reforms, you should do them very, very slowly. The three great monasteries didn't act well at all.   

**Q:**  I don't mean the assemblies in the old society. I mean in 1951. At that time, were the monks from the three great monasteries involved in the Mimang Tsondu?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. As Tsedorla said, people like Ganden's Lobsang Dawa were additional representatives. Because they [the representatives] held the power, the people couldn't fulfill their wishes.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, were there representatives from the monasteries?   

**A:**  Yes, they had to be there purposely.   

**A:**  The representatives of the abbots of the three great monasteries had to attend the meeting every day.   

**Q:**  No, I don't mean the Legjö. I heard there was a political anti-communist tsondu. Did the monastery participate in that?   

**A:**  Yes, the monastery was in that.   

**Q:**  Did they just attend the meeting in name only, or did they really do work?   

**Q:**  They really worked in that. Whatever kind of tsondu was held in Tibet, it would not be okay not to have the three great monasteries. They will struggle and hold power.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was the representatives from Drepung?   

**A:**  Drepung's representative was the Loseling Khembo Pema Tenzin [Tib. པད་མ་བསྟན་འཛིན] and the Ngagpa Khembo and probably the Gyepa Khembo.   

**Q:**  At that time, what was their opinion?   

**A:**  Their opinion was that if the reforms are done, it would harm the religious offerings. The Sawang and those people thought that if the reforms are not implemented, they would have their property as before for a while longer, so they blamed the three great monasteries saying that they do not want the reforms. Even though the CCP told them it was their own choice to do reforms, they didn't listen.   

**Q:**  So the CCP didn't say that you have to do the reforms, they just said that it would be good to have the reforms, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So what was the reason for them to hold the meetings? Was it the monastery's thinking that it is not good to have the reform [which they held] from the time of the 13th Dalai Lama? But at that time, all of a sudden something happened. What do you think about this?   

**A:**  The abbots and the monastic officials would say that the common monks won't listen to doing the reforms. They would say that they want to leave the religion and politics as it was in the past. And if we do whatever the CCP says, it won't be good. Whenever there was a meeting, that's what the abbots and monastic officials would say. That's why our work didn't work out at all. The Communist Party said we won't interfere with the affairs in Tibet. You should change things with your own freedom. We will look to see if your reforms and changes are doing good or bad.   

**Q:**  Although it is hard for me to know, but what I know is that on one side the People’s Assembly was opposing the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was just an informal [Tib. ད་ག་སེ] assembly. The PRC called it the fake assembly (Tib. tsondu dzüma [རྫུས་མ]). In the past, there was Drepung's Jayan Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ], Sera's monk nicknamed Bag Troyö [Tib. བག་གྲོ་ཡོས], and Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] who was an ex-monk of Sera. These three were the big supporters of the 2 sitsab. The Chinese issued the verdict saying, "You are not allowed to hold the meeting because your activity is not good." [the people's assembly was actually banned by an edict of the Dalai Lama]. It was because of this that the 2 sitsab were demoted. At that time, it was said they were the fake representatives. Actually, they (the members) said that we are the [people's] representatives, but they weren't [actually] appointed by the people. Therefore, the Central Committee was correct saying that they were fake representatives.   

**Q:**  Were those representatives monastic officials in the monastery or were they just [monk] representatives from the monastery?   

**A:**  They just said that they were representatives, but they were not appointed by the common monks. After the 2 sitsab were demoted, they were put under detention [Tib. དོ་དམ] and those things. After this, we had some temporary representatives which were called the deity worshipping representatives [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ་འཐུས་མི] like us. In this, there was Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག] and Alo Chöndze and from the Tsang area there were Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག] and Gomang Kyilma [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དཀྱིལ་མ]. [Note MCG: This refers to the 2nd people's association of 1955-56].   

**Q:**  Was Alo Chöndze a monk at this time?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't a monk. We were involved in the making of the golden throne for the Dalai Lama. When our work was done, we performed a longevity ritual (Tib. ཏེནཤུག [Tib. བརྟན་ཞུགས]) for the Dalai Lama. Bumtang and me and Alo Chöndze.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Alo Chöndze a monk of Gomang College?   

**A:**  He was not a monk.   

**Q:**  Why did people call him chöndze if he was not a monk?   

**A:**  At that time, after the golden throne was built, we performed a longevity ritual for the Dalai Lama. Then we were supposed to have finished our work. Later, after the Dalai Lama came back from India [in 1957], Bumtang Trunyi, Gomang Kyilma, Lhabju, me and a kind of Chushigandru again set up a tsogpa called the tsogpa for performing rituals and worshipping deities [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ་ཞབས་བརྟན་ཚོགས་པ]. Finally, we were saying that the representatives should meet at the meeting time and go back home when it is the time to go back. We were also not representatives sent by the people. We were just volunteer representatives.   

**Q:**  When did this start? was it in 1951?   

**A:**  It started when the Dalai Lama went to India [he went in November 1956.]   

**Q:**  No, I don't mean when the golden throne was offered. This was later on. When did the first People's Association start?   

**Q:**  The first Association was set up when the sitsab were demoted. We set up that Association later on when the Dalai Lama came back from India. At that time, they arrested Bumtang Trunyi and Alo Chöndze. This was the conclusion work of the representatives and then the revolt took place in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  If the monks got angry, they might have risen up and made a commotion [Tib. འུར་རྒྱག], but I don't think they did that at that time. Although the monks didn’t like the communist ideology, they just stayed idle and didn't do anything. I am not sure whether they were doing something behind the scenes. I mean if they didn't like something in the monastery, they would rise up and cause troubles and kill the abbot and beat up people. But it seemed to me that at that time they just remained relaxed using the dayan coins. Some monks told me that this was just an outward attitude, and that we had joined the People's Association from behind and we did a lot to oppose [the Chinese]. How did these things happen at that time? This happened in the years 1951-52-53-54.   

**A:**  In that year, I don't think Ganden's Lobsang Dawa was there. In the beginning, there were Jayan Dawa and Ganden's Lobsang Dawa. When the sitsab were demoted, Jayan Dawa fled to Drepung and they couldn’t imprison him. The others were arrested.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: At the time when the People's Association was set up, do you think that the three great monasteries sincerely supported the People's Association ideologically and also economically?   

**A:**  There wasn't any support like that. They,like Lobsang Dawa, just volunteered and said that they were the representatives.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Who else was there?   

**A:**  From Sera there was Thamjö Sonam.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: He used to live in Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] and he had a wife, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but he was a very good person.   

**Q:**  He couldn't say that he was a representative of the monastery because he wasn't a monk, right?   

**A:**  Tsha Trunyi [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག] was also saying that he is a representative of the monastery, but he also had lost his celibacy.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Who was there from Drepung?   

**A:**  There was Jayan Dawa; he hadn't lost his celibacy. They just came on their own expenses. When the sitsab were demoted, we had a law case between the Tashilhunpo and the government taxers under the Jidzong [Tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] on the matter of working as corvée labor and paying taxes.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: As far as you are concerned, you were from Shigatse, but nobody selected you and spent any expenditures for you, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I came to Lhasa as a representative to file the law case between the government taxpayers and Tashilhunpo. Therefore, when the two sitsab were demoted, I wasn't involved in this political event. I just kept quite and went to the Kashag to request a quick settlement of the case.   

**Q:**  MCG: At that time, weren't you allowed to do this? [get involved in the People's Association?] Tashi Tsering: Alo Chöndze was also said to be a representative of the traders, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We, the representatives, didn't kind of like him. Alo Chöndze was show-offish and made a relationship with the Lord Chamberlain Phala.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: You didn't really trust him, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The people like Andru Lama [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་བླ་མ], Tsawarongpa Dampa Lodrö [Tib. ཚ་བ་རོང་པ་དམ་པ་བློ་གྲོས] and even Andru Gombo Tashi [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] didn’t dare to join our group/association [Tib. ཙོགཔ]. They just implied that they were [members of the People's Association], but actually they were not because they had to be responsible for whatever they would do and there was no way to blame other people.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Didn't you hold a kind of a demonstration near the Lhasa Middle School located behind and west of the Potala?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't anything like this, except the one that occurred during the revolt.   

**Q:**  Did you prepare for doing that?   

**A:**  Yes. We made a lot of preparation and gave a lot of money to the beggars and we told them, "In case the Central Committee would arrest us, i.e., Alo Chöndze, Bumtang Trunyi, Lhabju and Bisu, you people have to yell and you should come." Actually, they won't come, right?   

**Q:**  They didn't come right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: At that time, you didn't hold a kind of big demonstration, right? I heard that you did.   

**Q:**  MCG asking Tashi Tsering: Gyalo Thondup told you this right?   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: At that time, did you have relations with Gyalo Thondup?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. He was never involved in this.   

**Q:**  In Kalimpong, there was Shakabpa, Lobsang Gyentsen and Gyalo Thondup. They had a group called some thing like khentsi?   

**A:**  Oh yes. It was called Jenkhentsisum [Tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ]. This was just done in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Did you have direct relations with it?   

**A:**  We were implying that we had relations, and they sent a lot of letters to us. I used to receive the letters. Otherwise, nobody dared to receive the letters. There was a monk of Drepung's Gomang [College] called Ashang [Tib. ཨ་ཞང] who was from Ngari [Tib. མངའ་རིས] and lived in the house called Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] in Lhasa. And there was also an ex-monk of Nechung called Chogdrub [Tib. མཆོག་གྲུབ]. They would deliver the letters. Otherwise we didn't have relations with them directly, but they [Jenkhentsisum] would say that they had relations with us. I received some letters signed by Gyalo Thondup and I kept it as a very precious thing. The name Gyalo Thondup was not written that clear. Because of that, later when I arrived at Missamari in India, he hugged me and said, "You Bisu, are great."   

**Q:**  Was the goal of your group to have no reforms or to have the Chinese leave?   

**A:**  There were Shakabpa and Gyalo and Lobsang Gyentsen. Lobsang Gyentsen didn't have any knowledge, but Shakabpa took him as his partner because he would agree to whatever Shakabpa said. They said in their letters, "We have Jenkhentsisum here and you should hold meetings there." But we were unable to hold meetings. How could we do that when there was nobody going to receive the letters that they sent.   

**Q:**  At that time, people like you and Alo Chöndze were the leaders. So did you people think of expelling the Chinese or were you just trying to avoid the reforms?   

**Q:**  We were saying that Tibet belongs to the Tibetans and the Chinese should go back. At that time, the Tibetan people didn't have much of an idea [of politics], and when Gyalo Thondup and those people did those things, the people thought that this is great and they praised it [Tib. མངོན་པར་བསྟོད]. Otherwise, the people were not praising it.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: In short, you mean to say that the idea came from outside, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It seems to me that you just lost the war and lost so many troops in Chamdo, so how did you think you were going to achieve this goal of getting the Chinese to leave? How would they leave?   

**A:**  We had no plan at all.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Then was it was just an empty slogan?   

**A:**  Yes. Even this slogan was not able to be shouted loudly. For example, the Chinese arrived and liberated Chamdo and they treated the miser very well and helped them with their livelihood, so the miser sang a song with the words, "Communist Chinese are like parents we are grateful to and their dayan coins are pure Chinese silver." [Tib. རྒྱ་གུང་ཕྲན་དྲིན་ཅན་ཕ་མ་རེད། དངུལ་རྡ་ཡང་རྒྱ་དངུལ་ལྷད་མེད་རེད] " At this time, the Khambas liked the Chinese very much and the Khambas didn't notice that they had started very fierce reforms in Amdo. Then people began to get scared. When the Amdowas came to Lhasa they said, "Now, things are not good." [Tib. ད་མི་འདུག]   

**Q:**  At that time, people like you were against the Chinese, but were there people in the monastery who were saying, "It would be better not to oppose the Chinese. We should work together with the Chinese."   

**A:**  There were many people saying that. They were saying, "We can't handle the Chinese Communists and they are helping the people and they are giving us so much for religious freedom. What is all this about telling the Chinese to go back?" This was said by the people all over Tibet. But we were thinking that Jenkhentsisum might have something great to do and we were saying the Chinese should go back. We also heard that America and India will help.   

**Q:**  There were connections with those countries and there are the documents regarding this, but they didn't have the thought to send soldiers to help you. They were just verbally supporting a lot.   

**A:**  Even now, some of the separatists are saying that America will help. But we know that the Americans won't help us. Many people said this at that time when I was in Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ]. At that time we thought they would help us and they will come, but at the critical time, there was no help from America. So all the places were lost, in Yadong....   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering. It is kind of outrageous. Our country is very strange. Even though I can say that we want Tibetan independence, but that is an empty talk because I don't have the power. Some of our representatives are like crazy.   

**A:**  Not really crazy, but they are not thinking well.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: It is not that they are not thinking well, but they have great freedom. So people didn't need to depend on the government policy and they could express their own ideology. Sometimes, the policy of the American Government and the individual ideology is like this. [Probably, touching the two backsides of his hands to indicate opposite or opposing], but they are allowed to do that. But, here, the cadres can not have a ideology which is opposite from that of the government policy.   

**Q:**  So it is hard to understand the situation in the monastery. It seemed to me that in the beginning, they [monks] didn't have that idea [of opposing the Chinese], but later in 1957-58, they did something.   

**A:**  At that time, they [the monks] couldn't oppose the Chinese.   

**Q:**  In 1947, they got angry and started the Sera war, right?   

**A:**  In 1959, they had the thought of launching the revolt.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: At that time, when the time came up [to revolt] they had only two choices; one was to ask for favor [surrender][Tib. སྐྱབས་འཇུག་ཞུ] and the other was to rise and revolt. In 1951-52, they had the chance to do something.   

**Q:**  What was the view of the 2 tutors [Tib. ཡོངཛིན] [of the Dalai Lama] and the other big lamas. Were they advocating opposing the Chinese or not?   

**A:**  They were saying that it would be good to oppose the Chinese and we will get independence, but nobody could say in detail that if we do this, we will have this result. For example, at that time, one of the representatives of the three great monasteries was Thabkhela [Tib. ཐབས་མཁས་ལགས] who was the ex-abbot of Sera Jey. He said, "We shouldn't fight the Chinese. It is better to stay like this and depend on the help from China." So we didn't like him and people said he was two-faced. I hated him. At that time the abbots and representatives of the three great monasteries would meet everyday at the Legjö Office which was held on the top floor of the Jokhang.   

**Q:**  Those books produced by the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་གྲོས] are good, but did they write anything about the Legjö Office?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything about something being written in detail about the Legjö except there might be some brief things written.   

**Q:**  I heard that Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche was supporting the uprising?   

**A:**  People throughout Tibet had deep faith in him, especially in Kham. When Gyalo Thondup was doing something there, Trijang Rimpoche also might have thought that it would be good to do that. But he is not a person who would make relations.   

**Q:**  What I heard is that on his way back from China through Kham he mobilized the people a lot.   

**A:**  When he came back on horseback, he just expressed his opinion saying, "The situation is not good, so there might be some harm for the religion in the future." That's all he said. Otherwise, he didn't do anything.   

**Q:**  I heard that Surkhang supported the Khambas?   

**A:**  Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa talked with Surkhang and Surkhang thought that if we could do well, we may achieve the result and he didn't strongly say that we should not do that [opposing the Chinese]. I am a disciple of Trijang Rimpoche and I have faith in him and I would jump into the river if he would tell me to do so.   

**Q:**  He is famous and had a great knowledge.   

**A:**  At that time, Trijang Rimpoche told me not to provoke the protective deity in a fierce manner. It seems that the work of the CCP is fair. So he said that we should not do that since the Three Jewels and the protective deities are following the justice and they like the communists. Therefore, stay still." He told me this many times. After Trijang died, I came back to Tibet. If he would be there [in India] I wouldn't have come back. The Dalai Lama also didn't do well regarding the lama and the protective deity saying that Shungden [Tib. ཤུགས་ལྡན] is something [bad]. Our deity is Shungden and the Dalai Lama didn't treat Trijang Rimpoche well. Actually, Trijang Rimpoche made him [the young Dalai Lama] to stand on his feet. So how could he treat him like that.   

**Q:**  Regarding Shungden, I am reading your book slowly. This is very important. Some other Gelugpa lamas are also angry about this.   

**A:**  There is no Gelugpa who didn't like Shungden. The places like Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ] and Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ] are Nyingma sect. So they don't like Shungden.   

**Q:**  In 1954, I think the lay people and the monks never thought that the situation would be like this after 1959, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Those people didn't know about that. I have two sons who are in their 40s, both of them only remembered that the CCP is good and they are saying, "We are grateful to the communists, but the cadres made bad policies. So it would be good to reform that"   

**Q:**  I am not involved in politics and I don't have any idea whether this is good and that is bad. What I want from the beginning is to know whatever actually happened. In the old society, they have strange systems in the monasteries. Each tratsang had a different system and many monks didn't go to the (prayer) assembly meetings. It is hard for a foreigner to understand that.   

**A:**  Yes, the people in Tsang would like the book because there a part about the Panchen Lama in it. They only like the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  Trindor: Yes, when I went to the nomads in Lagyab [Tib. ལ་རྒྱབ], they were only thinking about the labrang. Only the staff or the clerks would say that the Dalai Lama is great, but the Tsang people didn't like him. They have a great faith towards the former Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  MCG: You are right. The people in tsang and ü had a different way of thinking. I am not sure about Kham because I never been there, but, the nomads liked all the lamas whoever they were. When they heard that a lama had come, they would go there and they didn't have much idea and they remain relaxed. They don't want to work much and they would hire farmers to tan their skins and pay them a sheep for tanning 10 skins. Actually, the nomads were poor and farmers are richer than the nomads.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Yes, but the sheep would not be that good.   

**A:**  It is good for you to write this book and write about the Central Committee's policy of leniency.   

**Q:**  I am writing about the things impartially that actually happened and I am neither writing that the old society was like heaven nor that it was like hell. When I write the truth, some people get angry. Trindor: the Chinese said that Trijang had provoked the uprising in Kham while he was in Tibet. Tashi Tsering talking to MCG: In 1956, there was a meeting of Jenkhentsisum, Ngabö and Surkhang probably in Gangtok. Ngabö said, "You people say Tibet is independent, but what is the basis of this. If you have [good] reasons, I will also stay here. Tell me the essence of your reasons." These 3 said, We don’t have any particular reason, but we are going to the gain independence based on the blood and flesh of the Tibetan people [Tib. ཤ་ཁྲག་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས]. Bisu said that Surkhang told him this. MCG: That meeting must have been be Delhi or Gangtog. Tashi Tsering: He said that it was held in Gangtok. Bisu also heard that they planned to assassinate Ngabö. MCG: Did the other people say that it would be good for the Dalai Lama to stay in India? Tashi Tsering: Yes, they were saying that, but I have never heard about this.   

