# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0063.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས] was a minor official (clerk) in Shigatse who played a role in the second People's Association in 1955-56 and then joined Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses his role in Chushigandru and about the Khamba plot to kill Ngabö and Surkhang. He also discusses the air drop of weapons in Drigu by the Americans and the arrival of Namseling, Samjola and Mengyiling. He also discusses how Surkhang and Yuthok were driven out of Dharamsala, and how Tashi Tsering and Gyalola came to Missamari in India to collect interviews. He then recalls how he recruited militia from the 18 dzongs in Lhoka.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0063_03/H_0063_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I was the only one who had great enthusiasm for opposing the PRC. They all called me <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Jola [in <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>]. At that time, all the people were saying that the Chinese are powerful and that we are incapable and the Khambas didn't have any ideas whether they would be good or bad. At that time, Chushigandru had gathered in Drigu and the people thought of killing Ngabö. People didn't know that he was a considerate person.   

**Q:**  Were there any other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་པ] 1. A person from Central Tibet (tib. དབུས) or sometimes someone from political Tibet in contrast to persons from Kham and Amdo. 2. Böpa is also used nowadays as a general name for all ethnic Tibetans.">böba</a> in Drigu?   

**A:**  No, I was the only one.   

**Q:**  How did you come to have a connection with Andrutsang and those people?   

**A:**  He was a rich trader who came to sell tea bricks so I had relations with him from the tea trade. At that time, all that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> talked about was that we should gain Tibetan independence and we established a kind of organization [in Lhasa]. We said that we would not be able to achieve independence from here (Lhasa), so we have to go to Drigu. In the past, there used to be some militia over there so we were saying that now we have to set up a (military) regiment in Drigu and oppose the Chinese strongly. Then we went to Drigu.   

**Q:**  How did you get to Drigu?   

**A:**  We had a Lhapsö Tsogpa [Association to do incense offerings to the deities] with Chushigandru. In this association was the father of Tshatrutsang, Alo Chöndze, Pelgong Chandzö, Bumtang Trunyi, and Shigatse Lhabju. I was the youngest. At that time, the elderly people didn't want to go to Lhoka. They were thinking that if they deal with the Khambas, they would become ineffectual because they [Khambas] didn't have any ideas [sense].   

**Q:**  Actually, they didn't trust the Khambas, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you trust the Khambas?   

**A:**  I was young and thought that even if I die I won't have any regrets. So I wanted to go with them, so I made connections with the Khambas. We were saying that first we have to kill some of the people who are pro-Chinese and we discussed how we should kill them. They asked me who am I going to kill? I didn't know what to say as we were talking about killing Ngabö and Surkhang. I had relations with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a>. Usually Dombor would keep quiet when he gets angry. Then one day, I went to see him and Dombor asked me what am I doing these days.   

**Q:**  Was this before you went there [to Drigu?]? Yes, I said, "Nowadays, the Khambas are really using their strength. They are saying that they are going to kill Ngabö and then they are going to kill Surkhang, and Tsögo. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> asked me, "Who are you going are kill?" I said, "I can't kill those people who they have said that they are going to kill. If I would kill Surkhang, he is the most capable person and the best persons in Tibet are Ngabö and Surkhang. So how could I kill Surkhang? If I have to visit him, I could have many reasons [for going]." Ngabö also came as a representatives and we had a lot of relations, so it was not good to kill this person. Then Dombor leaned his back against the wall and said to me, "No, you should think about it and say that you are going to kill Surkhang and Ngabö." I said, "I can't say that. What would happen if I say that I am going to kill the two best people?" Dombor said, "No. Wasn't there a war in Sera? At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> volunteered that he will destroy Sera and at that time, the two tsipön were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Ngabö. Kapshöba took them with him, but finally he internally protected Sera. As for you saying that you are going to kill both Surkhang and Ngabö, you can't do that. So you should say, "I will kill Ngabö, but finally, you should think about [ways internally] to cause no harm to Ngabö. You also have to say that you will kill Surkhang." At that time, whenever I would go to see Surkhang and Ngabö, they would let me in right away and the two of them told me, "You can visit us whenever I want to. We will tell our drönyer. Ngabö used to tell me, "If the people cause disturbances, they won't get any benefit." Then I told them [Khambas], "I will kill Ngabö. Don't worry about it." I didn't tell Ngabö about this, but I just went to visit Ngabö. I also told them, "Don't worry about Surkhang. I will also kill him."   

**Q:**  When was this? This was before you went to Drigu, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was before we went to Drigu.   

**Q:**  Who did you tell these things.   

**A:**  At that time, there was Andru Gombo Tashi and those people, but Alo Chöndze was not there. Andru Lama volunteered to kill Tsögo. Once in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> house, the Chinese threw a party and it was said that Bönshö Sey Phünwang [Tib. ཕུན་དབང] would drive Tsögo on his motorcycle. When he came riding on the back of the motorcycle, since Tsögo was smart, he said that he is not going that way. Andru Lama was waiting to ambush him on one side of the street so he couldn't kill Tsögo.   

**Q:**  Was he going to shoot him?   

**A:**  Yes, he was carrying a gun and was waiting for him, but he didn't come that way. There were many volunteers like Dampa Lodrö [Tib. དམ་པ་བློ་གྲོས], Kharchen [Tib. མཁར་ཆེན] Chandzö to kill those people. But they couldn't kill a single person. Then the Khambas said, "Let's go to Drigu. If we can go to Drigu and get prepared, then we can work out something. You are the only <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> [we have], so it would be good for you to go to Drigu." At that time, it seemed that I could not refuse to go. I thought that if I couldn't kill Surkhang and Ngabö and do something useful, I would not be able to go among the Khambas. Then all of the Khambas departed from Lhasa for Drigu and they told me, "Tsangpa Jola! come with us." And they also sent letters from there [Drigu]. Then I went there.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you really or sincerely think of killing them?   

**A:**  I didn't have the thought of killing them because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> told me to volunteer to kill them, but actually you should protect them. I didn't even think of killing Surkhang so I don't need to mention about Ngabö. Then I thought that if I would stay here, the Khambas won't leave me here and thought it would be better to go to Drigu. By that time, the majority had left for Drigu and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey [Tib. ལེགས་བཤད] said that he is also going. I had left my horses and mules and my guns in Shigatse. So I took a 305 English rifle from the [monk official] Wöser Bumtang [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་འབུམ་ཐང]. Amdo Lekshey brought me a mule and I rode that to Drigu with him. At that time, the Khambas said that they were doing something great and caused a disturbance in Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] and the PRC, of course, tried to protect Tsetang. I and Amdo Lekshey and about 30-40 Khambas went to Drigu. When I arrived at Drigu, there was nothing and there was no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> to eat. The only thing we could do was to rob from the misers and the misers were extremely frightened. I was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Jola and I also wore my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> long [like a Khamba] and we thought that the misers would come to us, but they didn't.   

**Q:**  Do you mean that you thought that the Khambas would come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, I thought the Böba would join <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> so that it would become bigger, but they didn't join us. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s said that we should send <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Jola [to call the Böba], but they still didn't come. The Khambas appointed me as the clerk for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and the person in charge of salary [Tib. ཕོགས་སྒྲིག] and I was also appointed as a kind of overall in charge [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]. At this time, there were 30 some Khamba magji and I worked with them. They regarded me very highly.   

**Q:**  How many Khambas were there when you arrived at Drigu?   

**A:**  About 5,000.   

**Q:**  At this time, had they left for Shang Ganden Chöngor?   

**A:**  I didn't go to Ganden Chöngor and they had not yet gone to Shang Ganden Chöngor. Then Andru Gombo Tashi and those people went to Ganden Chöngor. At that time, I was among the people who were going to Ganden Chöngor, but I didn't want to go since I thought that the Khambas would do the work in a careless manner, so we would not able to use our strength. I stayed with Jamatsang and we set up the regiment in Drigu and made a very big foundation for making war.   

**Q:**  What was the structure of the Drigu base? Who was the second <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>? Was it Jamatsang?   

**A:**  In the beginning there were 18 magji.   

**Q:**  What was the position of Gombo Tashi?   

**A:**  He was just going hither and thither doing general things.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  He didn't take the responsibility of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, but he had the power.   

**Q:**  So the main person in charge was Gombo Tashi, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was.   

**Q:**  Were the 18 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> from 18 different places or regions like Ganzi, Gonjo?   

**A:**  Yes, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> was appointed from each region. Of these, there is still one who is alive who is called Markham Rabgye [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས་རབ་རྒྱས]. He is living in Dharamsala.   

**Q:**  And there is Radrü Ngawang.   

**A:**  Yes, he is there, but all people did not trust him. He was a very strange person.   

**Q:**  He is from Litang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the beginning, he was like the obedient minister of Andrutsang. But he wasn't brave and he always withdrew [from the battle]. When we were in Drigu, the weapons were being dropped from a plane by the Americans, and there were also guns which had a brand/label of Taiwan. Since it was dropped from very high, it couldn't land well and got smashed, so most of the guns weren't useful and most of them were broken. At this time, there was an internal connection with the Guomindang. In Kalimpong, there was Phünkang Lhajam [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ལྷ་ལྕམ], but later she didn't get along well with Gyalo. We had prepared for war, but after Lhasa was lost, we all fled to India and there were so many people fleeing that in places like Jora we couldn't get through. When the Dalai Lama was at Chongye [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས], he met us and told us to tolerate the hardship, but by that time, there won't be anybody staying,right? So like this we arrived in India.   

**Q:**  Did you stay at E lhagyari [Tib. ཨེ་ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]?   

**A:**  Yes. We withdrew from Drigu and moved our base to E Lhagyari.   

**Q:**  How did you decide to move to Lhagyari? You mean all of you moved there?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, there were also people like me in charge of salary in Dakpo. After that, the biggest regiment was set up in E Lhagyari. When the war in Lhasa was lost, nobody took the guns and they just left them there and left for India.   

**Q:**  How did you make the decision to move to E Lhagyari? Did you hold a meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, we held a meeting in Lhasa and went to Drigu.   

**Q:**  Where did you get the food and fodder for 5,000 men and the horses and mules?   

**A:**  Mostly it was stolen or collected from the people.   

**Q:**  You would not be able to keep on doing there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that's why it was said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>'s work didn't have an end [Tib. གཞུ་གུ]. They didn't have any plan and it was like doing things while closing one's eyes.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] arrived, what did they say? Were you there?   

**A:**  The two of them were sent to Drigu.   

**Q:**  Were you there?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there from the beginning to the end. First <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjo la came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ]. They were supposed to tell the Khambas not to make the war, but they didn't succeed. And then Mengyiling Dzasa arrived with the representatives of the three great monasteries and told the Khambas, "Do not make war, you can't challenge [the Chinese]. Do you think a finger can poke the sky [Tib. མཛུ་གུས་གནམ་འཕིག་གི་རེད་པས]. He said a lot, but the Khambas didn't listen to him. [Note MCG: Mengyiling headed an earlier delegation sent by the Kashag. After this failed, the Kashag sent the Namseling delegation.]  

**Q:**  At that time, were they sent by the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They were sent to tell the Khambas not to make war, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but the Khambas didn't listen to them. Mengyiling just said it straight forwardly. Otherwise, the representatives of the three great monasteries were sure of winning the war and they didn't do their job well.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> came, did he really tell the Khambas not to make war?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> just said outwardly not to make war, but the two of them said [internally], "You should have solidarity and make war." At this time, I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> in Kalimpong told Yuthok to come to become the magji.   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  The representatives of the three monasteries like Ganden Lobsang Dawa who were in Kalimpong said that it would be good if Yuthok could come because the people will trust him. They invited him a lot, but Yuthok wouldn't move because they [Jenkhentsisum] weren't getting along well and a plot was made by Shakabpa. At that time, there was an ex-abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> college called Ngawang Lengden [Tib. ངག་དབང་ལེགས་ལྡན] who was one of the main persons. He said, "You shouldn't listen to Shakabpa. He is the one who is called the, "Dog-headed demon." [Tib. དམ་སྲི་ཁྱི་མགོ་ཅན་པ]. He is a bad person." But, we were duped and thought that he might have something great to do.   

**Q:**  Didn't the ex-abbot tell the reasons why he said that about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>?   

**A:**  He told his trustworthy people that it was said in a prophecy that he is the dog-headed demon so he will never do any beneficial things. He only thinks about filling his wallet. Later, Ganden Lobsang Dawa also went against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>. Normally, Sitsab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was regarded very highly, but at that time, Lobsang Dawa also said, "This old man is doing silly things [Tib. དཔྲལ་འཆལ་ལངས] and he is the running dog of Shakabpa so we shouldn't follow him." The Dalai Lama regarded Lukhangwa very highly.   

**Q:**  Was that when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> is in Tibet?   

**A:**  No, that was after he came to India.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had kind of verbal fights and Namseling told Chushigandru that you should go to the north to make war, but Chushigandru said we are not going to the north. If we would go to the north, we would not be able to get through [to escape to India]. So we are going to the south. Later, Surkhang and Trijang also discussed this. is that true?   

**A:**  At that time, Gyalo Thondup said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> should go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and try to hold Yadong. Then we can do everything. Litang Athar and Lotse were there and they were sending wireless messages, but it didn't work out well.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> tell them to go to the north?   

**A:**  There were the weapons in Ganden Chöngor.   

**Q:**  No, I heard this long after that.   

**Q:**  Then Andru went to the north to Shang Ganden Chöngor and [tried to] come back with the weapons. Since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> blocked his way, they couldn't get through. Later his troops got split up. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and the two of them (with Samjola) also said that it would be good to get the weapons from Shang.   

**Q:**  Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and the Khambas didn't get along well and did Namseling said that they should go to the north and the Khambas refused it, right?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola were saying that after we leave from here, we have to surrender to a foreign country and we should make relations with Taiwan. At that time, Jangtsa [Tib. འཇང་ཚ] Chöndze and Lonyendra [Tib. བློ་སྙན་གྲགས] said that they have a letter from Taiwan. Namseling told them that it would be good if we send Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ] and those people to Taiwan. Later, it became very dangerous for Namseling as there was a danger the Khambas would kill him because he said in a careless manner that Lonyendra, Jangtsa Chöndze and Jagö Namgyal Dorje should go to Kalimpong. The Khambas who were there said, "This is ridiculous! Namseling sent the three of them to Kalimpong so we are not going to spare Namseling and Samjola." However, when the revolt took place in Lhasa, they couldn't do anything. Otherwise, they would have killed them.   

**Q:**  This trouble happened before the revolt?   

**A:**  Not really the revolt, but it was before the Lhasa revolt.   

**Q:**  Gyalo Thondup was saying that they shouldn't make relations with Taiwan.   

**A:**  Yes, they would usually say that and he said that he had a great relationship with Jiang Kaishek. And that Jiang would treat him like his child. So it would be good to make relations with Taiwan and it was started like this. [Note MCG: He misunderstood the question]  

**Q:**  When they made the war in Tsetang, were you there?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there.   

**Q:**  How did that happen? Did you surround them and fight?   

**A:**  At that time we were in Drigu and since Tsetang is near by, we sent Khambas who had weapons. At that time, Targye Gomba Seysey's knee was injured by a gunshot. We were unable to last long there.   

**Q:**  You were unable to take over Tsetang, right?   

**A:**  How could we fight in Tsetang? In the beginning, we thought of taking over Tsetang and we approached very near to Tsetang, but the People's Liberation Army was there. So it was impossible to handle them.   

**Q:**  The PRC was always saying that the Tibetan Government was helping the Khambas surreptitiously. Surkhang and Phala <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> were openly saying that the Khambas are no good, but in reality, they were helping the Khambas. Is that true? What proof did they have?   

**A:**  The PRC side had no doubts that the Tibetan Government was helping the Khambas, but they didn't have any proof. The Dalai Lama, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> Phala and Surkhang came to Chongye.   

**Q:**  I mean before the PRC was saying that the Kashag and Surkhang had relations with the Khambas in E Lhagyari. Is that true?   

**A:**  They had a hope to gain Tibet's independence. When the Dalai Lama went abroad [to India], Surkhang told me, "Now, we don't have anybody to depend on. So we should go and try to save one's life. In the beginning, they thought that the Khambas will be capable and they will depend on them and trust them. Later, they knew that the Khambas are incapable. I met Surkhang when he came to Lhoka following the Dalai Lama. He told me when he was going for a walk, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> are not able to do anything. There is no future [Tib. ཕུགས] for us. India is also not going to help us. We will become like the Jewish race who had to wander around for 200 years and they didn't have their own country. So we also might have to say that we are going to do like the Jewish race and then finally we might gain independence.   

**Q:**  Did he say that in India or in Drigu?   

**A:**  This was in Drigu. He said the people in India like Gyalo and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> couldn't do the work.   

**Q:**  Yes, Surkhang would say that all the time.   

**Q:**  I am Jewish. From when you arrived in Drigu until you left Drigu, it might be a few months or a year, did you hear anything from the Khambas that the Kashag, Trijang, Phala and Surkhang were supporting the Khambas?   

**Q:**  It was just few months. I never heard that. It was said that Phala <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> would support us, but here wasn't anything about Trijang.   

**Q:**  There wasn't also any talk about Surkhang, right?   

**A:**  We trusted Surkhang a lot and we thought that he was capable. We never thought that the others were capable. When the Mimang rose in Lhasa, they yelled many times, "You aristocrats who wear yellow satin [gowns] will let us down. You should behave yourself and work hard." We heard that in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  This was during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> disturbance, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time Surkhang told the people, "We will not let you down [Tib. ཀོ་ཐག་གློད]. You people might let us down. So you should tolerate and work hard." Because of Phala, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and those people did those things. Phala was kind of reliable.   

**Q:**  Probably, he might be very crafty [Tib. གཡོ་ཆེན་པོ], right?   

**A:**  Not really crafty. He was reliable. But after he reached India, the Dalai Lama didn't treat him well. There was a big meeting held by Gyalo Thondup where he used his power and said that the Dalai Lama shouldn't keep these old man." It was Gyalo Thondup who drove them out. At that time, they held a meeting and said that we should do the political work for Tibet. I was there at the meeting. The most powerful was Shakabpa. When the meeting was held, Surkhang cut the ribbon. After the plans were made, they set up 7 offices. Then they didn't let Surkhang and Yuthok in the office and drove him out. They duped the two of them and told the two of them, "The two of you are not staying in the inner circle.   

**Q:**  At that time, they were in Calcutta and they didn't attend the meeting. I heard that they were called to the meeting, but they just stayed in Calcutta, is that true?   

**A:**  In the beginning they usually would not come to meetings at all. So they send the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> to Calcutta to call them to the meeting and he told them, "It would not at all be good if the two of you don't come because you two have to take the main responsibility." They duped them like this, and so they came to the meeting. The meeting was for setting up the Government [in exile] and Surkhang gave his opinions. When the meeting was held, the Dalai Lama said, "Surkhang and Yuthok would be incapable of working because they would just play mahjong. So the two of you should stay taking rest." Like this they didn't give them jobs. I heard that Mrs. Yuthok who is from the Dogönpa family [Tib. རྡོ་དགོན་པ] verbally fought with the drunyichemmo Angula severely saying, "You are the person who duped us. We didn't have any plan to go to Dharamsala. Look! Now, they didn't regard Surkhang and Yuthok as human beings." At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> also couldn't tolerate this and said, "If you leave aside Surkhang who is most knowledgeable, we won't be able to do our work independently. Please you two do not feel disappointed. I, the old man, will report the Dalai Lama and request that all of us should have solidarity." He said that, but how could they listen to him. Later Lukhangwa himself was driven out to kind of the edge.   

**Q:**  At that time, all the power was seized by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Gyalo Thondup, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> who did all the reckless things. Tashi Tsering spent his own money and learned the English language. When we arrived Missamari, you [TT] and Gyalo came together, right? [laughter]   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Yes, we were together.   

**A:**  At that time, you were wearing short pants and said, "What opinions do you have? [laughter] At that time, we were saying, "He [TT] is a very bad person. What opinions could we have in this situation? People scolded Tashi Tsering a lot.   

**A:**  Tashi Tsering: The main thing was that Gyalola and I went to Missamari and we wanted to ask them what the Chinese were doing in Tibet. Later we translated the informations into English and it was submitted to Geneva to the International Jurists' Commission. But the masses didn't know that. I wrote them in Tibetan and I and the Muslim Waila translate them into English. We stayed in Delhi for 2-3 months. This was arranged by Gyalola. At that time, the Judge was Pashinthang. At that time, there was Taring Gorge and Rinchenla. Later, it was said that it was taken to the UNO.   

**Q:**  When Litang Athar and them were dropped (parachuted) what did they say and what work did they do?   

**A:**  They said that they will drop guns on such and such a date and you should be able to take over <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>. If you could take Yadong and send a map, then the US will drop as many things as you want.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you Khambas take over <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**A:**  At that time, they didn't think of taking Yadong. We were saying, "America should have done something before Tibet was lost. Now, since Tibet is lost, what is there that the Americans can do."   

**Q:**  So you didn't have much hope, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time Athar and Lotse went with Andru Gombo Tashi on the mountain and sent the wireless message. They could just send the wireless message roughly and they could not accomplish it [what they were asking for] [Tib. ཁུངས་འཁྱོལ་གྱི་མི་འདུག]. This was just before the revolt. At that time, they said that America was asking where they should drop the weapons.   

**Q:**  When they told them to hold <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>? Was it before the revolt?   

**A:**  It was just before the revolt when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> arrived at Drigu. At that time, Athar and Lotse said that they had received a wireless message saying that you should try to take Yadong. At that time, it was the time of Eisenhower.   

**Q:**  Didn't Athar say that the Tibetans staying in Kalimpong sent something?   

**A:**  They didn't. Later, they [Khambas] were saying that they had relations with them [Jenkhentsisum], but they could not keep up the relations.   

**Q:**  When Athar and the other one, the two of them came, even you people didn't know who sent them, right?   

**A:**  Yes, even Gombo Tashi didn't know. Long after that, we tried to learn about that and we heard that they were sent by the US's CIA. Gombo Tashi is a very stupid person.   

**Q:**  At that time, Andrutsang was not there. He was in the north.   

**A:**  This was just before he went to the north. The troops in Drigu split into two units; one went to Shang Ganden Chöngor and one to E Lhagyari. I was one of persons who were saying that we were going to make a fierce war.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: there was an estate called Tsenyer [Tib. ?] that belonged to the monk official bodyguard of the Dalai Lama [Tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག]. Its estate steward was ]a woman] called Tsenyer Nyila. I heard that she carried guns and fought with the Khambas, was that true?   

**A:**  Not really fighting with the Chinese, but she verbally said a lot to the Khambas saying, "What do you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> have to do? What is your future? Leave alone carrying a stick, even if you carry weapons you won't get anything." Karchungwa [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང་བ] also said something like that.   

**Q:**  Did you see her?   

**A:**  Yes, she was kind of pretty.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: I heard she is still alive.   

**A:**  She was very tough.   

**A:**  Tashi Tsering: In the old society, she was very tough.   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola recruited some Tibetan militia in the Tsetang area and this militia comprised about 10,000 people, is that true?   

**A:**  This is true, but there weren't about 10, 000. They just made all people to become militia. There were 18 dzongs like Lhüntse and Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར]. They recruited militia from all those places.   

**Q:**  Were there about 1,000 people?   

**A:**  Yes, there might be a thousand and they recruited a lot of people hoping to do something.   

**Q:**  Did they bring the militia to E Lhagyari?   

**A:**  They just told them to come to E Lhagyari, but they were unable to settle down and do the work there. I was there doing this work from the beginning to the end. Before I left for Tibet [from India], I told the Chinese Embassy in Delhi, I apologize to the Central Committee and I am going back to Tibet. The Central Committee treated the Tibetans well in the past. Please treat them well in the future also." I didn't meet the Ambassador, but there was an office called Chenjichu [unclear, Chinese], they told me, "There is no problem, we will not inquire about your past."   

**Q:**  The militia didn't have weapons and food, right?   

**Q:**  There were no guns or food. We were mostly robbing to get our food.   

**Q:**  This was before the revolt, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was just before the revolt.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering. I heard that Tsenyer Nyila was appointed as the county leader.   

**A:**  Yes, she was unchallengeable and eloquent.   

**Q:**  When they dropped the guns, where did you think that they were dropped from?   

**A:**  We just saw the brands of America and Taiwan on the guns and we named the guns Tashi Kharing, but the guns were not reliable. Americans just sent a wireless message to Athar and said that if you could hold <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and send a map, we will drop weapons and ammunitions like rainfall, but we didn't get a place to show them.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there talk about holding Lhüntse?   

**A:**  The plan was to make Lhüntse Dzong as our main military base. It was supposed to be our capital. I reached there while fleeing.   

**Q:**  So you couldn't hold Lhüntse, right?   

**A:**  We couldn't hold it. We were just robbing the people.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Otherwise, you didn't have any source of getting food.   

