# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0228.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tamdrin Tashi [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** August 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Pema Shelling  
**Name:** Tamdrin Tashi [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 83  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tamdrin Tashi [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was a monk from Litang Monastery who was the older brother of Radru Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང], a main Chushigandru leader. In this interview, he talks about the fighting at Litang Monastery from 1956 to 1958 in which he was involved. He also discusses how he came to Tibet after that and joined his brother in Phembo, and then how that unit of Chushigandru returned to Lhoka, but along the way in the Tsetang area carried out a major ambushe of a convoy of Chinese trucks.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0228_01/H_0228_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What is your name?   

**A:**  My name is Tamdrin Tashi [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་བཀྲ་ཤིས].   

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  I am 83 years old.   

**Q:**  Where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in Rawa [Tib. དབྲ་བ]. Rawa was the name of our homeland. There were three parts in Rawa. It is the homeland of Radru Ngawang.   

**Q:**  What was the cause of the Litang War which started in 1956? How did the war first break out?   

**A:**  In 1956, I heard that the Chinese said that they were going to liberate us [do reforms]. After that, they said "There is no liberation. We are going to do reforms." Some of them said, "We are not going to do the reform and liberating for three years. So you should hand over your weapons to us. If you hand over the weapons, then there will be development in the country and production [will increase]. And there will be no fighting in the country. It will be very good. In the past, you have been using the weapons and killing each other. This is not good." The Chinese said "If you hand over the weapons, then there will be no liberation." Actually, we didn't have power. Even the County Leader [Ch. xian zhang] of Litang Ngari Shingkham was brought to China. The County Leaders of Ba [Tib. འབའ], Litang, and Gyaltang [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཐང] were brought to China. In the past, the meetings of Ba, Litang and Gyaltang were held in Litang, and the taxes were also paid to the Chinese in Litang. In the early times, Litang belonged to Dewashung and the leader was called the Litang Depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ]. I heard that my mother's father had been one of the ministers [Tib. བློན་པོ] of the Litang Depa.   

**Q:**  Was the Litang Depa a dzong head?   

**A:**  Yes. There used to be a dzong of Dewashung in Litang and the territories above the White Chinese Stupa [Tib. རྒྱའི་མཆོད་རྟེན་དཀར་པོ] belonged to Dewashung. Before the war in Litang, the building of the dzong was still in Litang. After that, it was destroyed in an earthquake. That was in the 1940s.   

**Q:**  In 1956, Litang was under Chinese control, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, when the people in Ba, Litang, and Gyaltang were saying that they were going to fight [with the Communist Chinese], Gyaltang didn't join them. In the beginning when the Communist Chinese came to Gyaltang, they had fought battles. The others let the Gyaltang people fight alone and Ba, Litang and Gyaltang didn't join the fight together.   

**Q:**  Did Gyaltang fight with the Communist Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes. There was a famous person nicknamed, "uncle bald" Aku Lemar [Tib. ཨ་ཁུ་ཀླད་དམར]. The Gyaltang soldiers went into a big cave and they fought with the Chinese and they killed each other. Litang Ngari Shingkham should have joined the fighting, but they sat on the sidelines, and watched them fight and didn't join them. So after that, the communists came up. How could they oppose the communists because it was just a small village area? The communists arrested Aku Lemar and promoted him. At that time, the Chinese didn't care how many Chinese had been killed. This fighting took place in 1953-54. If the Litang people had joined the fighting it might have helped. But people in Litang began to fight battles only in 1956.   

**Q:**  They fought with the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the cause of that fighting in Litang?   

**A:**  It was because the Chinese told us to hand over the guns. They said, "It won't be okay if you don't hand over the guns." The Chinese were just playing games. The Chinese head had come to Litang to liberate [reform] Litang. The military leader [the one with webbed fingers] had made a guarantee to Chairman Mao that he would liberate Litang. After he arrived at Litang, he held that meeting and told us to hand over our weapons. He said, "I am not going to leave you as you are if you don't hand over your weapons." This was the cause of the Litang battle. All of the county heads in Litang were brought to China. Even the leader of Ngari Shingkham was brought to China.   

**Q:**  What is Ngari Shingkham?   

**A:**  The whole area of Litang which had a thousand local units [Tib. སྡེ] was called Ngari Shingkham. They took all of the local chiefs (Tib. pönkhag [Tib. དཔོན་ཁག]) of that place to China. So there weren't any heads in the Litang Monastery. There were just some old monks. So there weren't any people who could make the decisions in the monastery because all of the heads were brought to China. But the people in the monastery discussed whether they should make war and said "If we don't make war, because the county heads are engrossed with money in China and because they are looking after their own private affairs," the people in the monastery decided to fight. They didn't have telephones, so they sent messengers to the county heads in China and told them that we were doing this and that. And they also sent letters to all the places in Ngari Shingkham, like Litang, Gyaltang, Chantreng and Ba saying, "On the 6th of the 1st Tibetan month [in 1956] we have to fight on the same day wherever there are Chinese in all the areas of Ngari Shingkham." We didn't get a chance to discuss whether we should surrender or not because the Chinese told us to hand over our guns.   

**Q:**  They wrote in the letter that they all have to make war on the same day, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they sent messengers and told them that the Litang people should fight against the Chinese in Litang and similarly, the Chantreng people should fight the Chinese in the Chantreng area on the same day. The battle was fought on the 6th. We fought first. The Chinese didn't start the fight. The Chinese were everywhere and they remained manifesting a "gentle" manner [Tib. འཇམ་པོ]. There were only about 50-60 Chinese in Chantreng at that time. However, our plan didn't work out. In Chantreng, there were just a few Chinese and the source of their drinking was far away from the Chinese Headquarters. So they said that we should cut off their drinking water. In the beginning, they fought each other. Then they didn't fight and they just blocked their access to their drinking water. They said that the Chinese would die because they didn't have water to drink. But the Chinese could make telephone calls and then planes came over.   

**Q:**  Did the plane bring them water?   

**A:**  How could they bring water? The Chantreng Monastery was located in this place and the Chinese Headquarters was located on the other side. There were Chantreng soldiers from several thousand of villages and all of them gathered in that place. They fought with the Chinese and killed several of them. Then they said "We don't need to kill them. They will die in a month if we cut off their drinking water." After the Chinese made the phone-call, Chinese planes came over and bombed Chantreng Monastery for three days.   

**Q:**  Did they bomb the main monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. Because the fighters were in the monastery, they destroyed the monastery and killed thousands of fighters, some of whom fled. There were only 20-30 Chinese in that place. Not a single Chinese man was killed.   

**Q:**  When they bombed the monastery, most of the people killed in the bombardment were Tibetans, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Not a single Chinese person was killed.   

**Q:**  Were many people killed and wounded?   

**A:**  My helper [Tib. རོགས་པ] who was with me was in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me the number of the people killed and wounded in the bombardment.   

**A:**  I don't know the exact number.   

**Q:**  Did they bomb the Litang Monastery?   

**A:**  They didn't bomb the main monastery. They bombed the mountain near Litang Monastery. I was in the monastery. If they had bombed the monastery, there were about tens of thousands [Tib. སྟོང་དམག་ཁྲི་དམག] of soldiers in the monastery.   

**Q:**  When they bombed in Litang, did they kill many people?   

**A:**  They just bombed the mountain. So not a single person was killed. In the beginning, the Chinese could not estimate the place well. They threw 8-9 bombs on the mountain at around 3-4 p.m. when I was in the monastery. Then the plane went back. Then the Chinese said, "The plane will come tomorrow morning and destroy the monastery completely. So you should surrender." In the beginning, Ba and Chantreng fought battles and the Chinese bombed and destroyed Ba and Chantreng completely. We fought in Litang later on. We fought each other for a month in Litang. At that time, the Chinese sent some of their Tibetan cadres like the [Tibetan] county leaders to Litang and they told us, "You should surrender. Otherwise, they will throw bombs. You should surrender before the bombs are dropped. Otherwise, people will be killed regardless of whether they are men or women." But we didn't surrender. We thought it would be useless to surrender. We Tibetans said, "We will accept completely whatever kind of liberation [reforms] are done in terms of material things [Tib. རྒྱུ], but we will never accept handing over our weapons."   

**Q:**  In what year did the Litang war take place?   

**A:**  It was in the 3rd Tibetan month in 1956.   

**Q:**  When did the war end?   

**A:**  The battles were fought through 1958-59-60. There were 20-30 people who waited for the Chinese, and ambushed and killed them.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there on both sides?   

**A:**  Altogether, probably there were about 10,000 Tibetan soldiers in the whole area of Ngari Shingkham. But we didn't have many weapons. Half of the fighters surrendered and we came out from Litang [to Lhasa].   

**Q:**  How many Chinese soldiers were there at that time?   

**A:**  We were just killing the Chinese and collecting their weapons. After that, we sent a petition to the dewashung through Andru Jinda requesting weapons support. Jinda talked about that in Lhasa and he sent people down to Litang and said "If you can hold on to your place, the Dewashung will help you with the weapons. Otherwise, we can't help you." However, at that point we were planning to come to Lhasa. So we didn't get the weapons. Later, they said they would help us with the weapons but they didn't. Even if we had gotten help, it might have been useless . Later, the Americans dropped 6-7 people. Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས] was one of the people who went for the training. When those people were dropped, they said that we could get the arms support. So the [Chushigandru] regiment was built in a very big, empty place. It was said that the plane would drop things. After that the plane came.   

**Q:**  Did the Americans airdrop weapons?   

**A:**  They didn't drop a single weapon. They just dropped those people. There was a person from Ba who was sending them telegraphs. He was really a tough guy. He had come from India on horseback and it took 2 months for him to get [back] to Litang. One of my relatives went with him to take him to the regiment in Ngari Shingkham. After that, he sent wireless messages and said that we needed to receive arms support, so they didn't make war for 2 months.   

**Q:**  What did he say in the wireless message?   

**A:**  He sent the wireless requesting an airdrop of weapons and he mentioned the place where the weapons should be dropped. He said that the Americans knew the place for the airdrop, because they had set up a kind of fire signal. But they couldn't drop the weapons and then the Chinese fought the battle.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese soldiers were there?   

**A:**  A large number of Chinese soldiers had came from China, and all the Chinese stationed below Lhasa, like in Kongpo and those places, also came to Litang. The Chinese knew that the Americans were going to airdrop weapons. After that, the Chinese destroyed all the soldiers in Litang.   

**Q:**  What kind of weapons did you people have?   

**A:**  We had whatever weapons we needed, like cannons and grenades because before that, weapons were dropped in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Did the Tibetans have those weapons?   

**A:**  Yes. They had dropped cannons, bren-guns, 303 English Carbines, and rifles called Tashi Kharing [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁ་རིང]. We had all kinds of weapons. The Americans had all the weapons, but they couldn't drop a single weapon in Litang.   

**Q:**  Did the people in Litang fight without weapons?   

**A:**  We had our own weapons. In our homeland, we had many weapons. Every household had Pamaling Rifles, 303 English Carbines. Even a middle class household had 20-30 weapons.   

**Q:**  What kind of weapons did they have?   

**A:**  They had Mauser Pistols [Tib. ལན་ཀྲུ], 303 English Carbines, Mauser rifles and all kind of guns. Those Mauser rifles were imported from America years before at the time of the Regent Reting. The rifles were very good, but the ammunition was rare. After that, we couldn't come up [to Lhasa]. We fought some battles and people killed each other.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me the number of casualties from both sides in this fighting?   

**A:**  Many people were killed. Among them, there were many chiefs. They were all destroyed completely.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese destroy the Tibetans completely?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Tibetans killed how many Chinese in those battles?   

**A:**  Probably, the Tibetans killed about 10,000 Chinese soldiers, and tens of thousands of Tibetans were also killed and many of them were captured. The Chinese shot the Tibetans regardless of whether they were men, women or children. The nomads and farmers who were at home surrendered and were imprisoned, and many prisoners died in prison. For example, the people in the village in Ba called Linga Shingpa [Tib. གླིང་ག་ཤིང་པ] were killed completely. There were very tough [Tib. ངན་པ] people in that place who were known to be heroes of the Ling Gesar [Tib. གླིང་གེ་སར]. I heard that the chief of that village ran away and crossed the Yangtze River. Probably he wasn't able to get through. Anyway, the Chinese were unable to seize him. When we came up towards Lhasa like this, we had about 200 soldiers. When we arrived at the Derge area, we fought with the Chinese at night and the soldiers got scattered. Out of 200 soldiers, only 14 of us arrived at Lhasa. Some of the others were arrested, some of them were killed and some of them might have surrendered. My younger brother was with me among the 14 people. Later, he died in India. Only 3-4 people out of the 14 people arrived at India. My father arrived at Lhasa and died. We three brothers arrived in India. Two of my brothers, Radru Ngawang and a Geshe, were in Lhasa. We arrived at Lhasa in the 10th Tibetan month in 1958. We were in Phembo Ganden Chöngor [Tib. འཕན་པོ་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] at the time of the Ganden Ngamjö holiday. Radru Ngawang had already left for the north to get the weapons from Shang Ganden Chöngor. It took 4 months for us from my homeland to Lhasa. We came along the northern route. On the way, we hunted wild animals and ate their meat.   

**Q:**  On your way, how many battles did you fight with the Chinese?   

**A:**  We fought a lot of battles. It was numerous because all the groups fought with the Chinese. We had to fight everyday because the Chinese were coming from everywhere. So all the groups fought with the Chinese and some of them were killed and some of them arrested. We didn't stay in one place and fight a battle. We were always going along the mountains and fought with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  How did you fight the battles?   

**A:**  We were in the middle and the Chinese had surrounded us. So we and the Chinese fought each other. We fought many times and the Chinese had already destroyed thousands of our soldiers. Finally, there were only 14 of us who arrived at Lhasa. Altogether, 20-30 people might have arrived at Lhasa, but all the other people were killed, and many of them surrendered and were imprisoned and died in prison.   

**Q:**  You fought battles many times, right?   

**A:**  I can't tell you the exact number, anyway we fought about several thousand times and several thousand people fought in the battles.   

**Q:**  Did you fight these several thousand battles one by one?   

**A:**  No, supposing one of our groups was staying in a place and the Chinese came over, we fought with the Chinese and then ran away. We were not staying in one place. Litang had a vast amount of plains and forests so we were running away to those places. We fought the battles in 1956-57-58. Then at the end of 1958, we ran away up to Lhasa. We had been fighting in the mountains for about 2 years. However, in the first year, we didn't fight each other because, at that time, the Chinese were showing a gentle attitude. They were hoping that we would surrender.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the first year was 1956?   

**A:**  Yes, we started fighting at the end of 1957 and in 1958.   

**Q:**  After that, you fought the more severe battles, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then it had reached the point of life and death. Therefore, we didn't have any choice but to fight. Some people were talking about bravery, but actually, we were in a desperate situation. Even a child would also throw a stone when they reached that point.   

**Q:**  When the Tibetans were running away on the mountains, the Chinese had already surrounded the mountains, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In those battles, many people were killed and wounded, right?   

**A:**  The casualties were numerous. Not a single man was left in the Litang Ngari Shingkham. Most of our soldiers who were in their twenties were killed, and people who were at home were arrested and many of them died in prison. Later, my older brother went to visit our homeland. He said there was only one man left in our village who was the same age as me. When I came up [to Lhasa], I was 37 years old. All of the men were killed and the women were left.   

**Q:**  When you were fighting the battles, did the Chinese have all kinds of weapons?   

**A:**  Yes. they had cannons, Jiguan machine guns [that hold 30 bullets in the magazine] and many different kinds of weapons.   

**Q:**  What kind of weapons did the Tibetans have?   

**A:**  We had the weapons that we took over from the Chinese. We didn't have many Jiguans. We were using rifles which held a clip of 5 bullets.   

**Q:**  Did you get these weapons from the Chinese when you killed them?   

**A:**  Yes. We took over tens of thousands of guns from the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Wow! You guys were really tough. What happened just before the Litang battle took place?   

**A:**  Regarding this matter, Radru Ngawang can tell you about that. When the communist Chinese first came to Litang, he was working for the Chinese in Litang Monastery. He went to Lhasa in 1954. He knows what the Chinese did at that time. I was not a monk in the Litang Monastery. I was a layman. Our father was a Chinese cadre.   

**Q:**  What kind of cadre was your father?   

**A:**  He was a cadre, but he didn't work for the Chinese. When the Chinese came to our village, he was telling them whatever they asked about the village. My father didn't take a single coin from the Chinese and he also told us that we were not allowed to take a single coin from the Chinese. I had my wife at home, but I didn't have children. The Chinese insisted many times and told me to go to attend meetings in China, but I didn't go because my father didn't send me. Our village had about 200-300 households. At that time, many people from other villages that had about 1,000 households went to China and they were paying a lot of money. I was young, so I told my father that I was going to China.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was about 31-32. I was longing to go for a tour and see the places in China, although I didn't know how to do work. In 1956, when they fought in Litang Monastery, Ngawang Dadrag was there in the monastery. He just stayed 1-2 months in the monastery then all of his brothers ran away to Lhasa. After that, he went to America.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, when the war broke out, what was your thinking? Did you think that you would win the war with the Chinese?   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese were staying in the Chinese Headquarters and the monks were in the monastery. They [the monks/fighters] were saying one after another that they wanted to go there [the headquarters] to fight. On the day that they went to fight, some of them carried guns and some of them carried swords. They attacked the Chinese Headquarters and took over about the half of it. The Chinese Headquarters was very big and at that time, we Tibetans were kind of stupid. The Chinese had dug pits at the backside of their headquarters and placed hand grenades in it because they were suspicious that the Tibetan would come. Our people were carrying axes and yelling that they were going to destroy the doors and the windows of the Chinese Headquarters. On that day, about 90 Tibetans from Yönrupön's [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན] group were killed in that place.   

**Q:**  How were they killed?   

**A:**  When they charged forward, they fell into the pits, and then the hand grenades exploded and they were killed. Altogether 500-600 Tibetans were killed in that place and they could not attack the Chinese Headquarters.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese were there in one house?   

**A:**  The Chinese were staying in the headquarters and dug pits. And the Tibetans fell into the pits and several thousands of them were killed in the bomb explosions.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, when the war broke out, did you think that you would win the battle? Or did you think that you would lose?   

**A:**  We didn't have any thoughts. We were just stupid. In earlier times, the Tibetans had fought with the Chinese and the Chinese had returned [home] again. But who knows whether the communist Chinese were going to annex [Tib. za--literally eat up] the whole world.   

**Q:**  Did you think the Tibetans would win the battle?   

**A:**  I didn't have any idea about that. Some of the Lamas did divinations and said that there would not be any problems [Tib. སྐྱོན་ས་མ་རེད]. And some people were saying that the Chinese will go back. But it didn't happen like the divination.   

**Q:**  Did you think that the Tibetan would win the war?   

**A:**  No, I didn't think like this. I thought that our people were stupid because they had never been to other countries. If the situation then was like nowadays, we wouldn't make the war because the Chinese would destroy us in one day. The Tibetans were really stupid and barbarian [Tib. ཀློ་པ].   

**Q:**  At that time, when you fought the battle, what did you think would happen in the future?   

**A:**  I thought that the Chinese wouldn't treat us well. I had a relative who was a trader and he went everywhere like in India. He told me "It is useless to oppose the Chinese because in any case we can't handle the Chinese." If we surrendered we were allowed to go to Lhasa and we had a good wealth. My maternal uncle was a high Chinese cadre. He told me "You should surrender temporarily. They will not kill you. Let us go to Lhasa in trucks taking our wealth with us, and then we can go to India. We don't know what will happen in the future." At that time, there were 3-4 family members and I didn't have children. But, my father said "How can we surrender to the Chinese. We have to die with the Chinese." So, we didn't surrender.   

**Q:**  Where was your uncle?   

**A:**  He was in Litang. Later, the Chinese killed him.   

**Q:**  What was your uncle's title?   

**A:**  He was a County Leader. He was the main person in Litang Monastery.   

**Q:**  Your father said that you shouldn't surrender to the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he said "Why shouldn't we die in the place where we were born? We should fight with the Chinese." After that, we were able to arrive at Lhasa. It was because of one's own karmic or cause and effect result [Tib. ལས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་སྨིན]. The people in our homeland were really stupid. Some of them were really wealthy, but they didn't think of running away. One of my older brothers went to another household as a magba. They had a lot of wealth and they had about 100 mules. When the battle started in Litang, they ran away to Lhasa with the mules and my brother also went with them. We also sent 10 mules along [with] him to Radru Ngawang who was then in Lhasa. But, later they didn't go to Lhasa. They stayed at the halfway [point]. They were just listening to what the Chinese were doing and watching whether they were going to liberate or not. They arrived at Lhasa after 5 months and then they came back because at that time, the Chinese were gentle. Even if some one had killed 100 Chinese, they didn't do much to them. The war had started in Litang but they were not doing anything on their way to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Why didn't the Chinese do anything even if a Tibetan had killed many Chinese?   

**A:**  The Chinese had inexhaustible people. They were surrounding the places slowly and gradually, and they planned to destroy them completely in one day.   

**Q:**  When the first war in Litang broke out and Yönrupön was killed, did they stop fighting for awhile after that?   

**A:**  After that the Chinese said that they were going to talk about the issue and said that no one was allowed to go outside for a month.   

**Q:**  The war stopped after Yönrupön was killed, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese said that "We are not allowed to fight against each other. We are going to talk about the case." At that time, the Chinese might have thought of killing Deyong Atrin [Tib. དེ་ཡོང་ཨ་འཕྲིན], the main Military Officer [among the insurgents] [Tib. དམག་དཔོན]. He was a monk from Litang Monastery and the Chinese were searching for him. The Chinese sent 1,000 soldiers to kill him but they couldn't kill him because he had a lot of helpers. Once When he was in a household, the Chinese surrounded him, but they just took away some horses and mules and not a single person was killed. The Chinese couldn't handle him and he ran away. Like this, the Chinese had deceived people many times. The Chinese were trying to make people surrender.   

**Q:**  Did the Tibetans tell the Chinese that they were going to stop the war?   

**A:**  No. The Chinese said that they were going to stop the war and people were not allowed to fight against each other. At that time, the Chinese deceived us and later they started the fighting.   

**Q:**  What was their purpose for saying that they were going to stop the fighting?   

**A:**  Their purpose was to kill the Litang Monastery monk who was the commander. At that time, the Chinese gave money to many spies among the Tibetans who were then going back and forth.   

**Q:**  Where did those spies go?   

**A:**  They were going where the Tibetan fighters were and they were telling the Chinese about that. Then they led the Chinese to that place. Battles were fought for about 2 years. After they stopped fighting. The Americans airdropped people in Litang and after that we fought with the Chinese again. We were fighting just before we left Litang. After the battle stopped, the Chinese fought against the Tibetans and then we fought each other several times.   

**Q:**  Did you fight guerrilla warfare or real warfare?   

**A:**  We fought guerrilla warfare.   

**Q:**  How many times did you fight guerrilla warfare?   

**A:**  [Once] 20-30 people went to wait to ambush the Chinese. We asked the people in the village from where the Chinese were coming. We also sent some sentries. Then we waited for the Chinese and killed them.   

**Q:**  How many times did you fight like this?   

**A:**  I can't tell you the number of times. We fought many times like this. Actually, there wasn't a single day on which we didn't fight. But when our people were not destined to die, they didn't die. It depended on Karma. Probably, it was also a kind of karmic result [Tib. ལས་འབྲས] that we lost our territory to the Chinese and the Chinese had some kind of [good] fortune [Tib. སྐལ་བ] to be able to annex Tibet.   

**Q:**  Usually, what time did you engage in guerrilla warfare?   

**A:**  We didn't have any fixed time. We fought day and night, whenever we met the Chinese.   

**Q:**  How did you fight guerrilla warfare?   

**A:**  We fought wherever the Chinese would come and then we exchanged fire. We didn't stay in one place. We had to run away after fighting. If we stayed in one place, we couldn't handle them because the Chinese had inexhaustible people and ammunition.   

**Q:**  How much ammunition did the Tibetans have?   

**A:**  We didn't have much ammunition because we had to buy it. So we had only about 100-200-300-400 bullets. We were just using the guns and ammunition that we got from the Chinese.   

**Q:**  From where did you buy the ammunition?   

**A:**  We had bought them from the Chinese in the past. During the second World War, they had air-dropped millions and millions of guns and ammunition into China. Later, the Chinese sold them. At that time, we could buy as much we wanted, like 100-200 loads of ammunition and guns. The Chinese were also making weapons, but they were not good. The Americans dropped Japanese weapons in China. Those guns were very good.   

**Q:**  Did those Japanese guns hold many bullets?   

**A:**  There were guns that held many bullets and there were also guns that held only a few bullets. There were also cannons for sale. But, we didn't buy them.   

**Q:**  The Tibetans bought guns?   

**A:**  Yes, we could buy tens of thousands of guns if we wanted.   

**Q:**  You also got weapons from the Chinese from the fighting?   

**A:**  Yes. Once when we fought a battle in Litang from the morning until 12 noon, we killed 2,000-3,000 Chinese soldiers and Litang Monastery got most of their guns. The remaining Chinese ran away. Later, tens of thousands of Chinese soldiers came.   

**Q:**  How did you manage your livelihood when you were fighting the guerrilla warfare?   

**A:**  We just had to take whatever food we had, like tsamba, butter, dried cheese and salt. We didn't have much meat because there were tens of thousands of soldiers and we would have had to slaughter a lot of animals.   

**Q:**  Didn't you bring yaks and sheep with you for slaughtering?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. We just slaughtered some animals and took a little bit of meat with us. When we were in Litang, we didn't have problems with livelihood. Later, when the Chinese took possession of everything, I heard that they faced hardships regarding their livelihood. But, at that moment, we had already arrived at Lhasa. When we were in our homeland, we didn't face hardships on livelihood because we were taking things like bandits when we were fighting.   

**Q:**  When you arrived at Lhasa, how did you join Chushigandru?   

**A:**  When we arrived at Reting, we heard that the so called Chushigandru had gone to Lhoka, and it would be difficult if we went to Lhasa because the Khamba fighters had left Lhasa. Consequently, the three of us didn't go anywhere, but instead we sent our servant to Lhoka. At that time, Radru Ngawang had gone to the north and had gotten separated [from Gombo Tashi] and had come to Lhasa. So we sent our father and my older brother to Lhasa. Radru Ngawang met his father on the way. After we got in touch, Radru Ngawang told us to come to Phembo and he was also going there. After that, he came to Phembo and we met in Phembo Ganden Chöngor monastery at the time of the Ganden Ngamjö holiday. The Ganden Chöngor Monastery treated us very nicely. Radru Ngawang had about 70-80 Chushigandru soldiers who had gotten separated. We stayed in the Yulnga [Tib. ཡུལ་ལྔ] shiga. This estate supplied the salary for the Ganden Monastery. All of the well-to-do households helped us with barley and tsamba and treated us very well when they heard that we were Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  You joined the Chushigandru, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that point, Andru Jinda had left for Shotalhosum. That is, Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང]. Radru Ngawang said that he was going to ask the oracle to go into a trance and give a prophecy about whether it would be good to go to the place where Jinda was or go to Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར]. We received the message through a messenger that the prophecy said, "You should leave right away tonight and go day and night to Lhoka." So we bought 14-15 horses from the nomads, and paid a lot of barley for them. There were many monks from Ganden Chöngor who didn't have horses. Then we went to Yulnga Shiga and then we went to a big shiga in Phembo at night. At that time, we didn't dare to travel during the daytime. So we went at night. Before that, some of the Khambas from Ganzi went to Lhoka from that place but, the Chinese had ambushed them and killed many of them. So we went at night and arrived at a monastery belonging to Karmapa [Tib. ཀར་མ་པ]. After that, we planned to go through Chushul to Lhoka. We heard that there were Chinese soldiers in Chushul. Therefore, 8-9 high quality fighters were sent ahead to Chushul. We heard that the Chinese had set up a telephone line. So Radru Ngawang told the soldiers, "Go first and cut the Chinese telephone line, and watch where the Chinese were staying and seize the Chinese soldiers." Later, we heard that there weren't any Chinese there." When they went to Chushul, they found that the Chinese had left for Lhasa. Not a single Chinese was there. After that, we went to Chushul at night and we told the boatmen to bring two ferries at dawn. At that time, the people were afraid of Chushigandru and they were treating us well. When we arrived at the ferry site, the ferries were ready for us and we crossed the river. We had about 80-90 soldiers, but we didn't have many weapons. After that, we stayed in the village of Jagsam Chuwori [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཆུ་བོ་རི]. In that place, there were no Chinese so it was kind of calm. At about 10 p.m. the wind was blowing so strong that we could no longer stay there because the houses were almost collapsing. People were saying that that might be a bad omen. We heard that Chushigandru had left tsamba, butter and dried cheese in Jönga Shiga which belonged to the Drepung Jiso. This had been left there for the soldier's salary/rations. Then we crossed the mountain pass and went to Jenga [Tib. སྤྱན་སྔ] Shiga. I went there first and I found some monks were there doing calculations. When they saw that Chushigandru had arrived there, they stopped calculating and collected their things. But Radru Ngawang told them we will stay on this side and you do your calculation. In that shiga, they had about 1,000 cushions made from hair of musk deers. All of our soldiers stayed in that shiga. Then we asked them where Chushigandru's butter and meat were stored. The monks then brought the key [showed us]. There was tsamba, butter, and meat, whatever we wanted. The fighters said that today we should enjoy ourselves, because it was the holiday on the 6th and 7th days of the 11th Tibetan calendar which were said to be highly inauspicious dates when bad luck abounds (Tib. ངནཔ་གུནཛོམ [Tib. ངན་པ་རྒུ་འཛོམས]). So the soldiers played mahjong and cards, and sang songs. They brought some beef and told my servant and me to make momo. One of my brothers took the binoculars that belonged to Radru Ngawang upstairs and then quickly came down and said, "The Chinese have arrived." That person was young and not brave, so he told us this as if the Chinese had arrived at our gate. So all of us were afraid. When we asked him, "From where are the Chinese coming?" He said, "They are coming from there and about 20 trucks were driving along the other side of the river bank." After that, the soldiers were sent to wait for the Chinese on the hill near Jagsam Chuwori and watch what the Chinese were doing. Then a fighter came along and said that the Chinese trucks had gone back to Lhasa. They were building a highway and there were many carpenters making rafts for the vehicles to cross the river. They said that "The Chinese might not come at daytime. Probably, they might come at night." After having our meal, and loading our things and saddling our horses, we went to wait for the Chinese. If we didn't load the things, we might have to run away at night [and wouldn't be able to do so then]. That night the weather was very cold. We sent 2 riders ahead and told them that "If 2-3 trucks are coming, you should come back galloping and then we are going to wait [in ambush] for the Chinese." However, they came back and said it seemed the Chinese wouldn't be coming. There was only one truck on this side of the river and there were 30-40 trucks on the other side of the river. So we came back and drank tea and then they went up again to wait for the Chinese. I didn't go because I felt very cold. Then it was said that the Chinese might have gotten a message telling them that we were there, so probably they were not coming. Radru Ngawang said, "We have to deceive the Chinese by saying that we are going to run away, so then the spies will inform the Chinese." After that, the misers brought hay for our horses and they told the misers, "Do not bring hay. We are going to run away because many Chinese have come."   

**Q:**  Did you wait for the Chinese in Jagsam Chuwori?   

**A:**  No, we waited for them near the road a little downward from Jagsam Chuwori. Then we went down to the place where there was a dzong and we said "We have to wait there tonight. The miser will tell the Chinese that we are running away so they will come tonight." But that night the Chinese didn't come. The next morning, at about day break, my servant and I were sleeping behind the house when people in the dzong were saying that the Chinese were coming. I saw the Chinese trucks coming down from the estate. My servant and I were told to stay there and saddle the horses and get ready to go. They said that they would go to fight with the Chinese and kill some of them and then run away because there were 60-70 trucks and probably, there were around 1,000 Chinese soldiers. They didn't come back for a while, and we saddled our horses and we were ready to go. Right at that moment, one person came over and told us that Radru Ngawang said, "We are going to let 2 Chinese trucks pass by and then we are going to attack them. So you should let 2 trucks pass and then destroy the trucks." At that time, there was a person from Chamdo with me. He told me, "We shouldn't wait for the Chinese trucks in this place. We should go to the plain to wait for them. If we can't kill the driver, we will miss the trucks [they will escape]." This person had been to the north with Chushigandru, so he knew how to attack them. There was also a person from Amdo. He didn't have a gun. He just had a sword, but he was a very tough person and he also knew the Chinese language. He said, "No, problem. When the Chinese come I will speak Chinese and tell the Chinese to stop the vehicle. Then you can shoot them." So I and another person waited in one place. We told them "First we will shoot the vehicles. If we don't stop the vehicles, then you guys should shoot them."   

**Q:**  The two of you were waiting on the mountain, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was a mountain range and there were also some houses nearby. Just after that, a truck drove over and each of us fired 5 bullets and killed the driver. The truck stopped there. The trucks were full of Chinese, and they had set up a Jiguan Machine gun on the truck and they fired the Jiguan at us. In that fighting, we killed about 20 Chinese. After that, another truck drove over. When we shot the truck, the driver was really tough and he drove the truck into the river and the truck sank into the river.   

**Q:**  When the truck sank into the river, did all of the soldiers die?   

**A:**  Yes. all of them died. But the truck was not swept away by the water. Just at that moment, Radru Ngawang came over and told us, "We better unload the guns on the trucks because many trucks are coming and there are a large number of Chinese [with them]." He had sent some people to where the Chinese were coming. Then Radru Ngawang carried away a Jiguan with the ammunition from the truck. He said that he was going to take it to where the Chinese were coming. In that fighting about 30 Chinese soldiers were killed and we took over all the guns. One of our people was killed and another one was wounded.   

**Q:**  Where did the other trucks go?   

**A:**  When the two trucks were stopped, the other trucks didn't come down, and the Chinese got out from the trucks and climbed up the hill where the dzong was located. After that, we fought each other for a while. Then we were telling each other that we should leave and then we went to Lhoka. When we arrived at Yamdrog [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག] there was a lot of dry meat to eat. After that, 14-15 Chinese trucks came to Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] as reinforcements because they knew that we had fought the battle. The Chantreng group was waiting to ambush the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Where did the Chantreng group wait?   

**A:**  They knew that the Chinese were coming along that place. They planned to come to Jenga Shiga, but on their way they heard the Chinese were coming. So they waited in that place.   

**Q:**  Did the Chantreng group wait for the Chinese in Jenga Shiga?   

**A:**  No. They didn't know that we were there. They just came to guard the place. When we got to the shiga, there weren't any Chushigandru there. The Chantreng group killed over 100 Chinese in that fighting and 8-9-10 Chantreng soldiers were also killed. The main regiment of Chushigandru was in Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]. We stayed in Chongye Riwodechen [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས་རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན]. The people in charge of paying salary/rations to the Chushigandru fighters were there. Later, we also went to Lhagyari, and they held the meetings and discussed about making war.   

**Q:**  After that, did they fight in Tsetang?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that if we didn't do something in Tsetang, the Chinese would come to that place.   

**Q:**  What did they do in Tsetang?   

**A:**  When we were in Chongye, it was said that the regiment should move to Lhagyari. There were two estates in that place. Who was the Kudrak who went to Taiwan?   

**Q:**  Do you mean Surkhang [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང]?   

**A:**  Yes. We were told that we should move to Surkhang's estate and we should fight in Tsetang. At that time, the estate manager was Kungö Wangdü Dorje [Tib. དབང་འདུས་རྡོ་རྗེ].   

