# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0228.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tamdrin Tashi [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** August 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Pema Shelling  
**Name:** Tamdrin Tashi [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 83  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tamdrin Tashi [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was a monk from Litang Monastery who was the older brother of Radru Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང], a main Chushigandru leader. In this interview, he talks about his experiences in Chushigandru and how he went to Lhoka. Additionally, he talks about his meeting with a lama in Reting   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0228_02/H_0228_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What was the name of Surkhang's [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང] estates?   

**A:**  One was called Khesum [Tib. ཁེ་གསུམ] and the other was Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད].   

**Q:**  Did the Chushigandru soldiers come to those estates?   

**A:**  The horses and the things were brought to that estate while the soldiers were making war down there. Later, the Dalai Lama came from Lhoka and stayed for a night in Chongye Riwodechen [Tib. འཕྱོང་རྒྱས་རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན]. Regarding these things, Radru Ngawang can tell you.   

**Q:**  When you joined Chushigandru, you didn't need to tell them that you wanted to join them, right?   

**A:**  We didn't need to say anything. Later, when the Chushigandru ran away, the Chinese had arrived at Tsöna.   

**Q:**  Did they fight with the Chinese in Tsöna?   

**A:**  Yes. They fought and killed many people. When we went through Mön Tawang [Tib. མོན་རྟ་དབང] it was easy to go along the main road. Many traders had gone through there in the past. When we had to go through it from this side, we had to cross very high snow mountain passes like Magola [Tib. ?], which is like a pillar erected under the sky. All the people had to go in line holding each other.   

**Q:**  Those were the Chushigandru soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And there were many misers also. There were tens of thousands of people going.   

**Q:**  Were you in Drigutang [Tib. གྲི་གུ་ཐང]?   

**A:**  No, I wasn't there. They had set up the regiment in Drigu at the beginning. Later, when Andru Jinda went to get the guns, the main regiment was moved to Tsöna. I heard that Jinda said, "We shouldn't leave Tsöna as an empty place. We should stay and guard Tsöna by all means." That was because in case we lost the territory, it would be easy to go to India through Tsöna. But the other people just moved the regiment to Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི].   

**Q:**  What was the reason for moving the regiment to Tsöna and Lhagyari?   

**A:**  If we lost the territory, it would be easy for the soldiers and the misers to run away through Tsöna. While Andru Jinda was away, Chushigandru fought two battles in Lhoka, but they couldn't handle the Chinese. If we had to go from this side, we had to cross snow mountain passes.   

**Q:**  When they fought the battles, there might have been a lot of casualties?   

**A:**  Probably, I don’t know in detail.   

**Q:**  The reason for moving the regiment to Tsöna and Lhagyari was because it would be easy to run away, right?   

**A:**  It was not good to stay in Lhagyari. That was a bad place, because people had to go through Nyan [Tib. གཉན] and Loyul [Tib. ཀློ་ཡུལ] where the road was very bad. It would be easy to take the things that belonged to Chushigandru if we had stayed in Tsöna. At that time, Radru Ngawang's servant brought all of Radru Ngawang's wealth to Lhagyari saying it was a safe place. Later, they couldn't go to Lhagyari and they had to flee directly from Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Who decided to move the regiment to Lhagyari?   

**A:**  They [the others] probably had discussed that and they just guessed and moved the regiment. At that time, Andru Jinda was not there.   

**Q:**  When you heard that the regiment was moved to Tsöna, what did you think?   

**A:**  I was not there. But I thought if we couldn't handle the Chinese, sooner or later we would have to flee. So it would be easy to go from Tsöna because the road was good.   

**Q:**  Until 1959, in which of the Chushigandu's battles were you involved in?   

**A:**  As I told you, I was involved in the fighting with the Chinese near Jagsam Chuwori [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཆུ་བོ་རི]. This was the only fighting that I was involved in. While Andru Jinda had gone to the north, they moved the regiment. Probably some people might have thought of stealing things because there was a lot of money in that place. So they said that it would be good to move to Lhagyari. Actually, we should not use other people's things. But we didn't have any choice but to eat the food from the misers on our way. For example, my brother-in-law, who is here working as the chandzö of Trijang Labrang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་བླ་བྲང], was 18 years old then. He is from Chantreng. When we were on our way to Lhasa in 1958, once he went into a nomad's household and brought out something in a leather pouch. When I asked him what is in the pouch, he said that his boots were worn out so he took a pair of boots from that household. I told him to return the boots and I told him, "I will give you my boots. Now we are about to reach Lhasa so you can get whatever you need from your uncle and your father." We had gold, silver and money at home, and there were three of us brothers and another person who was adopted when we came up. But we didn't take even a single dayan when we came up. It was because we had been making war on our way. Some people robbed a lot of things from the misers.   

**Q:**  What did you bring when you came up [from Litang]?   

**A:**  We brought guns and horses. But the Chinese robbed our horses on the way and we had to walk. We also had to sell the guns and buy clothes and foods. On our way, we arrived at Reting Labrang where they treated us very well. The Labrang had thousands of horses. We only had about 7-8 horses and mules, but all of them were weak. Reting Labrang let us chose whatever horses we needed and we gave them the weak ones. They gave us as much tsamba, butter and meat as we wanted when we stayed for 4-5 days and nights. There was a Lama in Reting who was in retreat at that time. He was really a living Buddha [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་སྐུ་དངོས]. He told us "Now, the situation is not okay. but I am too old to leave." He was living in a very comfortable hermitage. He asked me what I was up to. I requested him to do divination about whether I could meet my brother who had to go with Chushigandru. Second, if I sent my father and my elder brother to Lhasa, would there be any problem for them? The Lama said, "There won't be any problem if you send your father and your brother to Lhasa. Regarding your brother in Chushigandru, you will receive a message from him soon and you will meet him."   

**Q:**  Did you meet him later?   

**A:**  Just after I had asked the Lama for the divination, I saw there were several people on the other side of the river and they were firing guns. Later, I learned that those people were the soldiers of Chushigandru who had gotten scattered and they were shooting musk-deer. I went to the other side of the river and I met two of the members of the eating group of Radru Ngawang. They told me, "We don't know the whereabouts of Ngawang after he got separated. Before the two of us got separated, Ngawang didn't have any problems. But we don't know what happened to him later on." After that, we asked the Lama to give us a protective talisman [Tib. མཚོན་སྲུང]. The Lama said "Alright, I will give you a protective talisman, but don't tell anybody that I gave you the talisman." Then he asked how many people we have. We told them we have 8 people, and he gave each of us a molded clay statue and said that we could also eat the statues. I told the Lama about the fighting in our homeland and he said, "Now it is useless to do that because the Chinese have reached the neck" [reached the most critical point].   

**Q:**  Did the Lama mean that it would be useless to fight?   

**A:**  Yes. He probably meant losing the territory of Tibet. That Lama really was a living Buddha. He was also very old.   

**Q:**  Did you join the battles that Chushigandru fought up to 1959?   

**A:**  I didn't join the battle fought in Tsetang. When we came up to Lhasa, on the way, all of us fought with the Chinese in different places. After I joined Chushigandru, they told me "You have come from a very long distance, so you don't need to go to Tsetang and everywhere." I didn't even have to go to stay on guard duty day and night. They told me, "You can just feed the horses and the mules."   

**Q:**  In 1959, how many soldiers were there in Chushigandru?   

**A:**  At the beginning, there were about 1,000 soldiers. Later, there were several thousands of soldiers in Lhoka. I don't know the exact number.   

