# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0001.02   
##  : with Dagnyer [Tib. བདག་གཉེར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Mag Xiang, Panam [Tib. pa snam], Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** August 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Ben Jiao  
**Name:** Dagnyer [Tib. བདག་གཉེར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 59  
**Date of Birth:** 1941  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The subject was a treba villager from Chugong in Düjung Dzong. In this interview, he talks in detail about his experiences in the Sino-Indian War of 1962, and how after that war ended he returned home and worked for the government building highways and bridges. He also talks about how the Cultural Revolution began and how he became a political activist. He discusses how he joined the Red Guards and how he took part in the struggle sessions held against the people in power. Finally, as he worked in the rukhag (brigade), he tells how he was selected as the grain dagnyer (manager) and how he was also the property manager in the commune for 26 years.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0001_02/OR_0001_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Then we stayed for a week and returned. When the regiment returned, our cavalry came on horseback to Shigatse. At that point, they sent the soldier who was from Norbu Khyungtse home because his home was near Shigatse. They didn't send me and another soldier home because they said that if they did, we couldn't get back before the regiment would leave. So the two of us sent a message to our homes through the soldier who was from Norbu Khyungtse saying that they [our relatives] should come to Shigatse to meet us. Our family members came to see us in the morning of the day that we had left Shigatse, so we didn't get to meet our family members. After we arrived at Lhasa, we stayed for a couple of days and then we went to Lhoka. We were just doing the training.   

**Q:**  When you were fighting in the battles were you afraid?   

**A:**  In the beginning, I was afraid. Later on, I was not afraid because I felt like I had gotten trained in how to do battle.   

**Q:**  At first did you think you shouldn't have joined the Army?   

**A:**  No, I didn't think like that.   

**Q:**  Mainly you were afraid, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I was afraid of being shot somewhere. Later, when we made war frequently, my fear became less and less, and I thought I may not get shot. When we were in Lhoka, the Tibetan Squad [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  In 1960 I was nineteen. In the year 1961, out of the ten Tibetan soldiers, five soldiers were discharged. At that time, they were discharging the old Chinese soldiers and recruiting new ones.   

**Q:**  Did you get a salary while you were a soldier?   

**A:**  The ordinary soldiers were paid twelve yuan per month, which was for buying soap and so on.   

**Q:**  Was this enough?   

**A:**  Yes because this was just for buying soap, etc. The clothing and the food were supplied by the regiment. I was among the soldiers who were kept in the regiment. Gyalpo and me, were kept in the regiment.   

**A:**  At that point, one squad from our cavalry gyashog was sent to Nagchuka and one group was kept in the regiment. The soldier who was from Shang Wuyug [Tib. འོད་ཡུག] and me were kept in the regiment. At that point, I told the leader that Gyalpo and me were from the same place so I wanted to go with him. So the two of us were sent to Kongpo and I stayed in Kongpo until 1962. We were doing military training and during the autumn we went to help the miser do their harvesting.   

**Q:**  Which part of the Kongpo was that?   

**A:**  That was in the 8.1. New Village, Bayi Shintsün [Ch. ba yi xin cun] in Nyishi. Our division [Ch. shi] was the 4094 and our company [Ch. tuan] was the 155th.   

**Q:**  Mostly, were the Tibetans friends with the Tibetans and the Chinese friends with the Chinese or did the Chinese and the Tibetans become friends?   

**A:**  The Tibetans would go together in the miser's houses to drink chang, and buy tea and butter and make butter tea on Sundays. The Chinese would not drink chang. Mostly the Tibetans would go together. In the regiment there were just a few Tibetans and we were friends. In the year 1962, we were sent to Mön Tawang [Tib. མོན་རྟ་དབང].   

**Q:**  What did they tell you?   

**A:**  When we were in Kongpo, the leaders told us, "The Indian government is invading the territory of Tibet so we have to be prepared and ready to make war whenever the order comes. The Indian soldiers are shooting and killing our border soldiers every day. If they do not stop shooting, we have to prepare to make war." But they didn't say anything about a date of departure. After that, our regiment was moved to Kongpo Drugla [Tib. 'brug la ??]. There were cavalry in Drugla. The cavalry company was in Langkang [Tib. གླང་ཁང྄] County. At that point, we were cavalry and we were wearing Tibetan chupa and going through the motions of acting as kind of spies. After that, our gyashog was divided. They were saying that one platoon should go after a battalion. When we arrived at Drugla, we received the order that we should leave the next day. Then we had to travel day and night, except for meal times. We ate our lunch in a place in Kongpo and we arrived at Lhasa at night. We had our dinner in Lhasa. The next morning we had our breakfast in Gongkar [ Tib. gong dkar] in Lhoka. Then we arrived in Tsöna. From Tsöna if one crossed the mountain pass from one side, you would come to Tawang. If one crossed the mountain towards the other side, one would arrive at the mountain pass called Gakyi [Tib. ?] La. We crossed the mountain and went to Gakyi La. From that place, all the vehicles were being sent back. We were told to take only the things that we needed for making war so we left our overcoats made from skin with the fleece on the inside and took cotton overcoats to be used as bedding. And we took summer clothes, as it was said that the weather was warm down there. In that place they held a mobilization meeting. On the other side of the mountain, there were the Chinese border defense troops. And beyond that, on the other side of the mountain pass, there were the Indian soldiers.   

**Q:**  What was the thinking in the unit when you were told to fight? Were you enthusiastic?   

**A:**  I thought that since India was a big country they might have a very strong military. It was said that they were well prepared in terms of weapons and so on. They were different from the Tibetan soldiers in the past and they had planes and artillery. So, I thought a tough war would take place.   

**Q:**  Were you afraid?   

**A:**  Yes, I was a little bit frightened.   

**Q:**  What kind of a gun did you have?   

**A:**  I had a 53 sten-gun [Ch. 53 chong feng qiang]. It was made in 1953. It was not the smaller one produced before that. At that time we had to contact the Chinese border defense troops. So the leaders of the regiment, battalion and the company left the main regiment on this side of the mountain and crossed the mountain pass to contact the Border Defense troops to inquire and investigate about the locations and the situation of the Indian border troops. I was sent as one of their bodyguards. We left at night. When we reached there, the soldiers in the sentry posts were sleeping on beds and the floor was very wet. We, the bodyguards, had to sit on the wet floor. I didn't know where the leaders went to sleep. The next day at dawn, we were told to come out and we went through a valley on this side of the river. On the other side of the river, there were Indian soldiers. We saw some sentry posts and five to six Indian soldiers walking back and forth. At that point, we were hiding in the forest. When there were no Indian soldiers we marched forward. It was almost dark when we came to the upper part of the valley. At that point, two [People's Liberation Army] soldiers came from the border troops and said that we should not go to the regiment on the other side, but rather we should go to the regiment located on this side. After that, a soldier and me were sent to the crossroads from where one road went downwards and another road was going on this side. Just before it became dark, the other soldiers came along to that place. We stayed there until the whole regiment arrived. They traveled the whole night and the next day at noon the whole regiment arrived. At that point, we couldn't see any Indian soldiers because the forest was thick. Then the leaders told us to build a sentry post where the leaders of the division were to stay. At night, we cut timber and built the sentry post. We saw the Indian soldiers getting up and making a fire. Then our army shot three flare guns and started firing artillery at the Indian soldiers. We didn't hear any gunshots, we could only hear the sound of shelling. At dawn, we saw that the forest was filled with dust. Then we were told to go forward and cross the river. We were bending our bodies and charging forward and the Indian soldiers were shooting a lot of guns. When they were shooting a lot, we would bend our bodies [crouch over]. When they would stop for awhile, we were charging forward. After awhile, I felt something that was like a poke from a needle. Then my finger hurt and I thought that it felt like it was bleeding. I just wrapped it with a towel.   

**Q:**  When you saw that you were bleeding, what did you think?   

**A:**  It was not a big injury. Only my finger was bleeding. After I came to the sentry post, there were a lot of soldiers injured. Their heads were wrapped with gauze and some of them were lying on stretchers. After that, we had to cross the river and go through a kind of gorge coming to a mound [ Tib. sa 'bog 'bog] where there was a sentry post with Indian soldiers. They were shooting a lot so we were not able to charge forward. When they were shooting a little bit higher, I was not very afraid because the bullets were hitting the trees. But when the bullets were hitting the ground, I was really afraid. If I tried to crawl forward, they were shooting on the ground. So I ran in a zigzag way. After that we couldn't charge forward any more.   

**Q:**  Were [People's Liberation Army] soldiers killed at that place?   

**A:**  Some soldiers and the company leader were killed there. The Deputy Company Leader [Ch. fu tuan zhang] was giving the orders. We had one machine gun for each squad so we lined up the machine guns and fired towards that sentry post. After that, the shooting from that sentry post stopped and then we charged forward. The Indian sentry posts were built on the mountain and the backside of the sentry post leaned into the mountain. When we arrived on the top of their sentry post, they didn't have turrets to shoot upwards. They had turrets in three directions, but not at the backside and the top. After that we threw grenades at the entrance of the sentry post, and we climbed up a little bit and looked down. Some of the grenades exploded in the sentry post and they [the Indians] were throwing out some of the grenades which exploded outside. The sentry posts were very easy to destroy. Our gyashog destroyed twenty-five sentry posts. But there were turrets in all the directions on that mound bunker so it was difficult to destroy. The soldiers of the main regiment were shooting at that mound bunker and then two soldiers were sent towards the bunker carrying explosives. Both of the soldiers fell down. After that, a Chinese soldier volunteered and said that he would destroy that mound bunker. Usually, the soldiers were selected to go. He charged over and we shot at the bunker a lot as he was charging over. When he got to the place where the explosives were, he laid down and threw a grenade. While the dust was rising up, he ran forward with the explosives. When the dust calmed down, he was crawling. And then he threw another grenade and came near the mound bunker. Then we didn't shoot because we were afraid he would get shot. He placed the explosives against the mound bunker and after pulling the fuse, he rolled down below the mound. After the explosion, the wall of the bunker fell down and the roof of the bunker made from timber also fell down. At that point we could see the Indian soldiers moving inside the bunker. We started firing at them. After awhile, when they were not moving, we charged forward to the bunker. Except for a few soldiers who were wounded, all of the Indian soldiers were killed. The Chinese soldier who rolled down, was not injured. He became the hero of that battle.   

**Q:**  When you were making war, did they send the Tibetan soldiers to more dangerous places or were they treated the same?   

**A:**  They treated us the same. The Chinese soldiers were using hand gestures telling us to lay down here.   

**Q:**  Did you have any contact with the local people?   

**A:**  In that place, there were no miser at all. It was in a mountain gorge. That battle was ended in four hours.   

**Q:**  How many Indian soldiers died in that place?   

**A:**  It was said that there had been 1,000 soldiers, and probably only 400 were left. After that, we piled up the corpses and let the captives stand around the pile of corpses. We were holding guns. The captive Indians were very scared. Probably they thought we were going to shoot them and throw their corpses onto the pile. The interpreters for Hindi who had been sent from Beijing made propaganda to the Indian soldiers regarding our policies. I didn't know Hindi, but the Indian soldiers were nodding their heads when they heard the propaganda. After that, they collected their guns and let them cook their own food. The injured Indian soldiers received medical treatment. We were not allowed to beat them, search their pockets, or insult the captives. We were told to treat them equally, although we had to be alert. They were given as much food as they wanted. After the battle was over, we were sent to the place called Rongpophu. On the way, we saw the Indian soldiers who had fled. They had piled up their guns and they were kneeling down and clasping their palms together. When we made the gesture that we wouldn't kill them, they were very glad and they were touching us with their bearded cheeks which made us to get stung with their beards. At that point, our leaders told us to do whatever they wanted us to do. When we came to Rongpophu, we saw that an Indian helicopter had fallen in that place. In that helicopter there was a brigade commander [Ch. lu zhang], a platoon leader [Ch. pai zhang] and the pilot. We captured the three of them and about 170 Indian soldiers. We shut them in a house and let them cook their own food. We kept watch over them around the house. We let them go out to fetch water and fuel. We were just looking after them. Probably they were told that they would be shot if they fled. After that, the Indian brigade commander told us, "If many soldiers stand here holding guns, our soldiers said that they are afraid of being shot. So please just put a few soldiers on guard here. We will never flee. I take responsibility for that." Therefore, we left just two soldiers looking after them. It was said that there was an order from the Central Committee that a single captive should not be allowed to flee and jump from the rocks. All the captives should be taken without hurting them. Our regiment brought the captives to the place where we had the first battle. After that, the other regiments brought their captives. On the way, we had to stay overnight. The Indian Leader told us through the interpreter that he had eaten food with Premier Zhou Enlai at the same table. He was asking, "Do you recognize Zhou Enlai?" And the interpreter said that he told the Indian Leader, "How could we not recognize our own Premier?" And then, he was asking, "Your soldiers looked so smart, was that because you trained them like that or do all the Chinese look smart like the soldiers?" The interpreter told him that all Chinese looked smart like that. Then he was asking, "Some of your soldiers are wearing good clothes, some of you are wearing torn up clothes. What is the reason for that?" The interpreter told them that our military officers and soldiers were wearing the same clothes, but their clothes were torn up in the jungle when they were fighting with their [the Indian] soldiers. It was said that the helicopter's tail had gotten hit with a shell, so it had to land. The Indian leader said that he had fought in the Second World War. And the Indian platoon leader said that he had also been in the Second World War and he had been imprisoned by the Japanese. After that we arrived at Tawang. In Tawang, we saw there were just a few miser living there. The other people were said to have fled.   

**Q:**  Were those Mönpa people?   

**A:**  Yes. When they heard that the Chinese were coming, they had fled. The few people living there were taking the things of the people who had fled. We took a rest in Tawang for a month. All of the Indian captives were sent to Chongye in Lhoka. They were given blue cotton padded coats, and trousers and felt boots. And they were also given washing utensils, mugs and chopsticks. They were kept for a month to undergo education. After the war was completely over, the captives were handed over to the Indian government. After staying one month in Tawang, we went to the east and crossed the mountain pass reaching some counties like Senge Dzong and Derang [Tib. ldi rang ?] Dzong and so on. Those dzong were known to be the dzong where the Tibetan government had distributed the 303 English Carbine to nine dzong in the past. In that area, the Indian soldiers were on the other side of the mountain pass and we were on this side of the mountain pass. There was a long distance between the border troops. At that point, many of our artillery pieces were brought to that place. When we went there to make war, we had only mortars and the artillery that could be loaded on mules. But then the heavier artillery was brought in trucks. When we were taking rest for a month, we were very happy. During that period, we didn't need to practice or study anything. And they were recruiting substitutes for the soldiers that were killed in the war. They recruited some discharged soldiers. In our company [Ch. tuan] there were 500 Tibetan soldiers. Only one soldier died and three were wounded in that war. In that regiment more than 200 Chinese soldiers [were killed] and more than 200 were wounded.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in one company?   

**A:**  There were about 5,000 soldiers. In one company there were three Infantry Battalions [Ch. ying]. There was an Artillery Battalion, a Medical Company and a Bodyguard Company and so on.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in a battalion?   

**A:**  There were a little more than 300.   

**Q:**  By this time, how good was your Chinese?   

**A:**  My Chinese was good. My pronunciation was better than the soldiers who graduated from China. They had been learning Chinese through books, but I learned my Chinese through actual life. After that, we fought the second battle. When we were on this side of the mountain, the Indians were firing a lot of artillery. At that point, we were not shooting a single shell. We were just avoiding them and staying where we would not be hit with the shells. But one of our regiments that was located nearer to the Indian troops was hit by an artillery shell that fell on their cast iron pot and killed about thirty soldiers. At that point, we were not shooting back. I didn't know the reason why. They [Indians] were shooting five to six shells every day. Later, after all of our artillery arrived, the soldiers were sent to the front to the Bhutanese border. In that place, horses could not pass so the infantry were sent to that place and circled behind the Indian soldiers. After that, we shot artillery and when the Indian soldiers were fleeing to this side, we attacked them. We concluded the war like that.   

**Q:**  What did you do?   

**A:**  I was among the soldiers who circled behind the enemy.   

**Q:**  How many days did you go to circle them?   

**A:**  It took two days and two nights to get to the battlefield. We came on the mountain range of this side. On the other side of the mountain there was the highway built for the Indian soldiers. We went down near the highway and stationed two squads of soldiers in two different locations along the highway, and deep down there some of our troops were stationed. When the Indian Army motorcades were passing by, we let them pass by until the head of the motorcade would reach deep down where our troops were stationed. Then we started attacking them from all directions.   

**Q:**  Did any Indian soldiers get hit with your shots?   

**A:**  I didn't know whether they got hit with my shots because many soldiers were shooting together. When the motorcade was coming, we shot them. When the driver got hit, he would roll down on one side of the highway. Some of the drivers would drive the truck against the rock when they got shot. Some of the soldiers who were on the truck died when they were trying to get down and their legs got tangled in the truck. Some of them died when the truck ran over them. Some of them died when they were trying to get on the truck. The Indian soldiers were really foolish. Instead of carrying their things on their back, they were carrying their things on their head. Some of the soldiers were very old. After the second battle was concluded, we received an order from the Central Committee saying that we were not allowed to go beyond the mountain pass and we had to withdraw to the previous Indian border. Our regiment withdrew to Tawang. The Dance and Song Ensemble of the Autonomous Region came to welcome us saying that we had gained a great victory. After we withdrew, we returned half of the artillery, guns and vehicles that we captured from the Indian soldiers. We were told that we weren't returning it to the Indian government, but in consideration of the hardship of the Indian people. We lined up the vehicles, artillery and the guns on a plain. They had put a white flag on the vehicle when they came to receive the weapons. After that, we returned to Kongpo to our former regiment.   

**Q:**  When you were fighting, did the leaders say that you couldn't surrender?   

**A:**  Yes, they said, "Do not surrender to the enemy. Even if you have to sacrifice your life, you should not surrender."   

**Q:**  What did they say would happen if you surrendered?   

**A:**  They said, "If you surrender, that would mean that you didn't know the situation of the State. Furthermore, if you surrender, that will show that the army didn't have an effect. Even if they seize you by force, you should sacrifice your life. You should not let yourself fall into the hands of the enemy."   

**Q:**  Did the Indian soldiers capture any of your soldiers?   

**A:**  Not a single soldier was captured by the Indian soldiers. They could not capture us.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because, they were just running away, so they were not able to fight with us. After that I came back and stayed in Kongpo. In 1963 I got permission to go home for a vacation.   

**Q:**  How did you come to get that?   

**A:**  I just asked for a vacation and came back home.   

**Q:**  Did you get permission?   

**A:**  Yes. When there was no urgent duty for making war, they permitted us to go home. There was only my elder brother taking care of the elderly [in my household] so my brother told me, "If you go back to the army, I can't take care of the elderly so don't go back. You should stay home." I didn't have any discharge certificate, but I just stayed home on my own decision. At that time, the Qu Zhang [Ch. qu zhang] of the Düjung Qu told me, "If you stay home on your own decision you will spoil the result of serving the Army and facing many hardships. It would be better if you went back." But I still didn't go back.   

**Q:**  Were there any changes after you came back after so many years?   

**A:**  Before that, the poor people didn't have lands and animals. But during the reforms they got land and animals. And the three feudal lords were not there. Especially the many who were servants got land and plowing animals. That was a great change. When I came back, the masses welcomed me.   

**Q:**  How did they welcome you?   

**A:**  They were dancing and saying that I was great for being a People's Liberation Army soldier. It was rare that a person from our village became a People's Liberation Army soldier. At that point, they were sure that I would go back. After that, when I didn't go back, the people were telling me that getting out of the army and becoming a farmer was like dismounting a horse and mounting a donkey [Tib. རྟ་བབ་བོང་བཞོན].   

**Q:**  Did Gyalpo stay in the army?   

**A:**  Gyalpo was discharged from the army.   

**Q:**  Was that before you left?   

**A:**  Yes, Gyalpo didn't go to Tawang. The day before our departure to Tawang, a new Chinese soldier's gun went off when he was cleaning it and Gyalpo's hip and neck were injured. Therefore, he became an injured person so they discharged him.   

**Q:**  Did the army send you any notice to return?   

**A:**  They didn't send any notices. After that, the People's Commune [Tib. མི་དམངས; Ch. gong shi] [rukhag] was established. I came home in 1963. In 1966 I went to build the highway in Nyalam [Tib. གཉའ་ནང]. At that time one person was called from each household who had more laborers. I worked at the Friendship Bridge [ Tib. mdza' grogs zam pa] for seven months with the People's Liberation Army soldiers. From Panam County they assigned a girl from Sharchog [Tib. ཤར་ལྕོག] to be the interpreter, but the Army wanted me to be the interpreter between the workers and the soldiers. When I told them that I was a soldier who didn't go back, the army told me that I could become a soldier again in that place. But I didn't do that.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because I had some problems at home and I had already stayed home. Therefore, I didn't join the Army again. After I came back [from Nyalam], the People's Commune was set up in 1969.   

**Q:**  Before that, wasn't the Mutual Aid Team set up?   

**A:**  Yes, when I first came home, the Mutual Aid Team had been established.   

**Q:**  What did they do?   

**A:**  There were two Mutual Aid Teams for poor people and another two Mutual Aid Teams that consisted of the middle class and the poor classes mixed together. If people joined the team of the poor people, people were supporting them using the plow animals. But the people were not supporting the other teams.   

**Q:**  When you came home, was the Mutual Aid Team already set up?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Hadn't they taken away the lands of your family?   

**A:**  No, they hadn't. At the time of the rukhag, all of the land and animals were merged together. They set up the organization for doing unified farming and husbandry.   

**Q:**  How did they first announce that?   

**A:**  We were not the first place where they set up the rukhag. At first it was set up in Düjung and other places. After that, they sent people with the experiences of this to our place. They were saying, "Setting up the rukhag was for the purpose of people going on the path of getting rich in unity. Regardless of whether one was rich, middle or poor, the livelihood of all the people will become equal. Now, socialism is the lower level, but later we will go to the high level socialism and the ultimate goal is the communist society."   

**Q:**  When they were talking like that, did you think that would be materialized?   

**A:**  I thought that if they had been successful in the interior [inland China], it would be successful in Tibet also.   

**Q:**  What did you do?   

**A:**  They elected a dütrang of the production brigade, a deputy dütrang, an accountant [Tib. རྩིས་པ], a deputy accountant, an economics manager [ Tib. dpal 'byor bdag gnyer], a grain and property manager [Tib. འབྲུ་རིགས་བདག་དངོས་ཀྱི་བདག་གཉེར] and a political dütrang [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད]. All together they elected seven people. I was elected as the grain and property manager. That was why people were calling me dagnyer.   

**Q:**  What happened during the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  When the Cultural Revolution started in 1966 it had no influence in our place. It was started from the interior [inner China]. During the ten years of the Cultural Revolution, we were not influenced very much. Later, the influence became more severe. When we first got the influence of the Cultural Revolution [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Why did they elect you as the dagnyer?   

**A:**  They were probably saying that I was an honest person because I had been a People's Liberation Army soldier. So I might not steal and embezzle things. I had a list of the things and the accountant had another list. We did auditing once a year. If there would be surplus, they would ask the reason. If there would be a deficit, they would ask the reason for that. The accounting was very strict and people couldn't embezzle even a single fen. If there were some deficit unknowingly, I would have to supplement it.   

**Q:**  Before the rukhag, were there taxes during the Mutual Aid Team era?   

**A:**  The rich and the middle peasants had to pay "Donation grain to the government" [Tib. རྒྱལ་གཅེས་སྤྱི་འབྲུ]. They were not paid a single fen for that.   

**Q:**  How much did they have to give for that?   

**A:**  I forgot the percentage. It was said, "Leave Three and Deduct One" [ Tib. gsum 'jog gcig 'then]. "Leave three" meant leave the ration grain, the fodder and the seed. The deduction might be the Grain Donation. They would count the percentage of the leftover grain. The people's livelihood was very difficult. Some people had a shortage of food and people were not allowed to do business. They were saying that was the path of capitalism.   

**Q:**  What period was that?   

**A:**  That was during the Mutual Aid team and the rukhag. At that point it was said that according to the policy of Chairman Mao, developing trade would lead to the path of capitalism. Trade was severely prohibited. So people were not allowed to sell and buy animals. Even the exchange between the farmers and the nomads had to be done secretly.   

**Q:**  What about the monasteries and religion before the rukhag?   

**A:**  At the time of the Mutual Aid Team, there were some monasteries, but there were only one or two people in the monasteries. The Nunnery of Sogang was destroyed by the masses during the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  It was not destroyed during the Mutual Aid Team, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Only the house of the nunnery was there, but the religious objects [Tib. ནང་རྟེན] were not there. At that point, the government didn't confiscate the them, but some people went to steal the things and the masses destroyed them too in the nunnery.   

**Q:**  What happened to the nuns and the monks?   

**A:**  They came home and some of them got married. Some others of them didn't get married and were just living single.   

**Q:**  During the Mutual Aid Team, were you allowed to practice religion?   

**A:**  People were only allowed to practice at home secretly. They were not allowed to practice outside openly.   

**Q:**  What about at the time of the rukhag?   

**A:**  At that point, the previously existing monasteries were left as before, but when they were using religion and doing some sort of destructive acts, they were brought down and subjected to struggle sessions. If they didn't do destructive things, they were sort of protected, but they were not admitting new monks in the monasteries.   

**Q:**  By this time, what did you think? And what were the other people thinking?   

**A:**  I was thinking that religion and the gods [Tib. ལྷ] do not exist in reality. This was used for threatening the people for the purpose of exploiting and suppressing them. They were saying that there is religion and god. But actually people were not worshiping the gods, but only so that the people didn't get any special kind of sickness. So I thought that the gods were just for threatening and harming the masses. Actually, they do not exist in reality. But I thought there were so many scriptures regarding the theory of religion which were related to the history of Tibet, that some of those were true.   

**Q:**  How did they introduce and organize the Cultural Revolution? And how did there become two groups?   

**A:**  In the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, it was said that we had to refute the line of Deng Xiaoping and Liu Shaoqi. Before that they were the leaders of the Central Committee, but during the Cultural Revolution, Chairman Mao said that we have to refute Liu and Deng. The reason why we had to refute them was that they said that establishing the rukhag was wrong and too early. Until there would be seventy percent rich peasants, the conditions for setting up the rukhag were not complete. And they were saying that regardless of whether the cat was white or black, the cat which could kill the mouse was a good cat. Regardless of whatever the class rank, whoever could become rich that was right. They were trying to dismantle the class struggle. They were mixing together the enemy and our side, the rich and the poor. That kind of line was a violation to the party's principles. Therefore, we had to refute it. That was the first mobilization [Tib. སྐུལ་སློང].   

**Q:**  Who came to mobilize that?   

**A:**  There were two groups in Panam County.   

**Q:**  How did there come to be two groups?   

**A:**  One group was called the Great Alliance [Tib. Nyamdre] and the other was called the Gyenlo [Ch. zong bu] [the rebels]. We didn't know about that in detail, but one group was saying that Party Secretary Liu of Panam [ Tib. pa snam] County was correct. The other group was saying that Deputy Party Secretary Wang's line was correct. And they said that we have to target the people in power in the Party. The masses didn't know the situation in detail. People were thinking that we had to attack all the people in power, regardless of whether or not they were correct. They were making propaganda saying that the people in power were following the line of Liu and Deng. Both of the groups were making the same propaganda, asking people which of the groups they wanted to accept. The main thing depended on the leader. When the leader stood on the side of one group, the masses would follow him.   

**Q:**  Which of the groups did you join?   

**A:**  We joined the group of Party Secretary Liu.   

**Q:**  What was your reason for joining that group?   

**A:**  The leader of the Xiang said that he was correct. So we joined his group.   

**Q:**  What reason did the Xiang zhang say?   

**A:**  He said that Secretary Liu was carrying Chairman Mao's line through to completion and the other group had the poisonous weeds of Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping.   

**Q:**  Was your group Nyamdre or Gyenlo?   

**A:**  It was Nyamdre.   

**Q:**  What did they say about Gyenlo?   

**A:**  They were probably saying that Gyenlo was rebelling against the people in power in the Party. Nyamdre was probably trying to unite the groups together. At that point, I couldn't get a clear understanding.   

**Q:**  The whole village belonged to Nyamdre, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the whole Xiang belonged to Nyamdre. The people followed their leaders, the Xiang zhang and the Party Secretary.   

**Q:**  Did the people in the two groups fight each other?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. In the Xian (county) they were just verbal arguments with each other, but in the Xiang there was nothing.   

**Q:**  How did they argue in the Xian?   

**A:**  In the Xian, there were two groups. One was correct and another one was not correct and they had their own followers. They were arguing with each other.   

**Q:**  Were there Red Guards?   

**A:**  Yes, they set up the Red Guards.   

**Q:**  How did they set up that? Were there any conditions?   

**A:**  There were three conditions to become a Red Guard: having a high political consciousness, having a firm standpoint and being below the age of forty. And the people should dare to think and dare to speak, and should be from a clean class rank [i.e. from the poor class].   

**Q:**  Did you join the Red Guards?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you join that?   

**A:**  It was said that all the gods and demons [Tib. ལྷ་འདྲེ་གདོན་བགེགས] should be destroyed. Before that we had the cairn of the local deities [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུགས] and statues and scriptures in the houses of the masses. We went to all the houses and took out all of those things and burned them.   

**Q:**  Did you think that was correct?   

**A:**  I thought those things were just for deceiving people. I thought they were useless things.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you joined the Red Guards?   

**A:**  I was twenty-six.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  Now, I am fifty-nine.   

**Q:**  At that point who selected the Red Guards? And how did they organize the people to destroy the demons and monsters?   

**A:**  The People's Government in the Xiang and the Branch Communist Party [Ch. dang zhi bu] in the Xiang selected the Red Guards.   

**Q:**  How did the masses react when you were destroying those things?   

**A:**  Some of the masses were bringing out their religious objects voluntarily. Some of them were hiding those things.   

**Q:**  Did you find the objects that they had hidden?   

**A:**  No, we didn't find them.   

**Q:**  When they hid those things, did the Red Guards punish them?   

**A:**  At that point, we didn't know that they hid those things. At the very end, when religion flourished again, then they took out the religious objects that they had hidden in those days. People were not allowed to inquire about that because it was said that the ten years of the Cultural Revolution was wrong.   

**Q:**  When you were a Red Guard what else did you have to do?   

**A:**  We had to put paper hats on people who didn't like the revolution. And we would write on his paper hat whatever wrong things he had done. And we took them around the streets. We held struggle session against the people from the higher classes, but they were not beaten. We were just shouting slogans and enumerating the matters that they had done. If somebody who was from the clean class had done something wrong, we would just advise them not to do anything wrong in the future.   

**Q:**  How did you get separated from your home, and how did you get married?   

**A:**  At first, my brother and I were sharing the same wife, but afterwards, when I was trying to join the Youth League [Tib. སྡེ་ཚོགས] and the Party, it was said that polyandry was not allowed. Therefore, I got separated from my home and I got together with my wife.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was twenty-three years old.   

**Q:**  Was your wife from the same village?   

**A:**  Yes, she was from the Labrang [under Tashilunpo]   

**Q:**  Did you join the Party?   

**A:**  I was not able to join the Party.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  It was said that my class rank was high, I mean middle.   

**Q:**  Why were you selected as a Red Guard, even though you were from the middle class?   

**A:**  At that point I was selected because I was quite active in taking responsibility of the work. Most of the Red Guards were from the poor class. There were a few people like me selected because of our active work. When we joined the Youth League, the members would raise their hands according to the person's work attitude, and the person who introduced that person and whether the person had loyalty towards the Party or not.   

**Q:**  Did you join the Youth League before you got married?   

**A:**  It was just after I got married. When I was about 28 years old, the time of the Youth League was over. Then two years after they destroyed the qu and set up the Xiang, in 1985, I joined the Party.   

**Q:**  In your place, who were the main subjects of the struggle sessions?   

**A:**  It was the ngadag, ngatsab and the counter-revolutionary people.   

**Q:**  Who were the subjects in your village?   

**A:**  Chugong Wangdü [Tib. དབང་འདུས] and Tendröl [Tib. བསྟན་སྒྲོལ], and there was Yamdrog Rimpoche [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] who died later.   

**Q:**  Were there any counter-revolutionaries among the masses?   

**A:**  There were no counter-revolutionaries among the masses, but some people had a little bit of a problem and were labelled, for example, one of the accountants of the rukhag called Khangmar Tenzin [Tib. ཁང་དམར་བསྟན་འཛིན].   

**Q:**  Why did they label him?   

**A:**  He probably took things from the Sogang Monastery. They also said that he made relations and talked with the Lama of Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] Monastery who later became a progressive [Tib. ཡར་ཐོན] and a representative of the National People's Congress. And there was also the person called Tsering [Tib. ཚེ་རིང] who was the clerk of the Xiang and he resigned from the clerk job saying that he was making relations with his brother Wangdü.   

**Q:**  At that point, how did you manage your production and your livelihood?   

**A:**  The production was arranged in unity in the evening.   

**Q:**  Did you hold a meeting every evening?   

**A:**  Yes. Meetings were held every evening. At these meetings they would make the work assignments for the next day. For example, watering the fields, plowing, tending animals and so on.   

**Q:**  Did all the family members have to attend the meeting?   

**A:**  One person had to attend the meeting from each household. That person would listen to the assignment and deliver the message to his household.   

**Q:**  How long would you hold the meeting in the evening?   

**A:**  People would gather at about 9 p.m. and the meeting would be finished at around 11-12 p.m.   

**Q:**  Would you describe how such a meeting was held from the beginning to the end?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they would read a quotation of Chairman Mao which was related to the work that should be done. After that, they would assign the work. After that, we would sing a revolutionary song like the one that said, "Navigation depended on the helmsman, Revolution depends on Mao Zedong's thought" [Ch. dahai hang xing kao duoshou/ gan geming kao mao zedong sixiang]. And we sang the song "The East is Red" [Ch. dongfang hong]. Then the meeting would be over and people would go home.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, did you have quarrels or struggle sessions at the meeting?   

**A:**  Except for the period of the Cultural Revolution, there were no struggle sessions at these meetings. But some people were treated differently from the masses and supervised when they were working. Otherwise, all people were same.   

**Q:**  Who were the main activists in your village?   

**A:**  Do you mean in terms of thinking or action?   

**Q:**  I mean in all aspects.   

**A:**  At that point, Yülkhang [ Tib. g.yul khang] Tratug [Tib.?] was the Political Dütrang and the Director of the Management Committee of the Xiang [ Tib. xiang do dam u yon lhan khang gi zhu ren]. He was the most active person in our village. And there was the Deputy Xiang Zhang and the production dütrang called Khandoshang [Tib. ?]. In our village they were the main activists.   

**Q:**  Were there any events among the masses, like saying that they had folded and burned Chairman Mao's photo, or had hung boots near his photo?   

**A:**  There was not a single event like that in our village. Maybe in the lower part of the Xiang there were some events like that. At that time, we didn't see anything like that. But we didn't know what they were doing in their homes. They were not doing those things openly.   

**Q:**  How did the Cultural Revolution end?   

**A:**  That was probably in the year 1975-76 or something like that. Actually, in our place, the Cultural Revolution occurred all of a sudden for one or two years when they said that we should destroy the demons and the monsters, and the people in power. After that, they were just making some propaganda of the Cultural Revolution, but there were not many people taking action during the whole ten year period of the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  What happened after the Cultural Revolution was over?   

**A:**  Chairman Mao died in 1976. Before that, they were making some announcements, saying that the Gang of Four -- Yao Wenyuan, Zhang Chun Qiao, Jiang Qing and Wang Hongwen-- had come out and we had to refute them. Before that, we were told to study the Dazhai led by the Party Secretary Cheng Yonggui and the Deputy Secretary Guo Xilan.   

**Q:**  At the time of the Dazhai, what did you do in your place?   

**A:**  We also made fields in the upper part of the valley. We went through the motions of making the fields, but we didn't get any yield because there was no irrigation in that place. Afterwards, it was said that Dazhai was made by the Gang of Four. Chairman Mao didn't give permission for doing that. Especially, it had been made by Jiang Qing. They just raised Dazhai up, but actually it was not correct. At that time, we didn't know how to listen to those things.   

**Q:**  When you all of a sudden heard that the Cultural Revolution was not good, what was your thinking?   

**A:**  The actual mistake of the Cultural Revolution was that they said that we should destroy all the gods and demons. Actually, when we look through the perspective of Tibet, many relics [Tib. རིག་གནས་དངོས་རྫས] were destroyed. Just after that I thought and now I think that was a bad deed which completely erased the history.   

