# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0033.01  
##  : with Norbu Wangdü [Tib. ནོར་བུ་དབང་འདུས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, Tibet Autonomous Region/China  
**Date of Interview:** 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gyatsho  
**Name:** Norbu Wangdü [Tib. ནོར་བུ་དབང་འདུས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1930  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee was born in around 1930. At the age of thirteen, as part of a monk tax, he joined the Gadong Monastery. He describes in detail his life at the monastery, including learning to play the trumpet for the religious dance rituals. The interviewee also discussed about when he and some of the other young monks ran away from the monastery in order to try to avoid a punishment. The interviewee also explained how he eventually left the Gadong Monastery and became a monk at Drepung Monastery. However, although a replacement for him at the Gadong monastery was found, they still brought a case against and insisted that he return. The subject also tells about how he later moved to Lhasa as a layperson and spent several years working as a cart driver in the construction office and also doing other jobs as a servant of Tsarong's servant. The interviewee also explains in detail about the revolt in 1959 and how Tsarong, the commander or magji, in the revolt, was arrested, etc. The subject tells how he choose to return to his village leaving the contruction office and tells of his life experiences from the start of Democratic Reforms through the Cultural Revolution and how he worked as düdrang in the rukhag (brigade), but got his things confiscated in the Three Great Education campaign.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0033_01/OR_0033_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  My name is Norbu Wangdü.   

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  Seventy years old.   

**Q:**  Your health is still very good. Where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born here. My father, mother and everyone were from here. It has been long since my parents expired. My parents were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> (taxpayers) of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] from the estate called Ngödupding [Tib. དངོས་གྲུབ་ལྡིང]. My father, besides paying taxes in kinds and services, did work for the late hailstorm blocker [Tib. ལག] such as sowing and harvesting the estate's fields during spring and autumn and also driving the donkeys and ploughing fields. My mother worked as a hired laborer [Tib. མི་གླ]. My parents had eight children and I was the third son. The eldest son was a monk in Drepung Monastery. He expired at the age of 74.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  The condition of the society was not good then but we are human beings and we were able to survive.   

**Q:**  That is right?   

**A:**  But, talking about our lives in the old society, we were children and our parents fed and looked after us. We could eat rice only on the first day of our New Year (Losar. We ate especially a rice dish called Shamdre [Tib. ཤ་འབྲས] with potatoes and meat. Other times it was difficult to get such a dish. Until 1964, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, was the only staple diet that we depended on. The flour was the Tibetan wheat flour which is ground at the water mill and was not very fine. We were very lucky even if we got thugpa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བག་ཐུག] A soup that contains a mixture of tiny dough (flour) balls the size of a fingernail (and if available, cheese, meat, and radishes).">bagthug</a> soup made from that once a week. That is how it was. Then I became a monk at the Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] Monastery.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was probably thirteen years old at that time.   

**Q:**  What did you do before that?   

**A:**  I went to graze the sheep and collect animal dung.   

**Q:**  Was that for your own home?   

**A:**  Yes, we were children, you see. What we collected the precious day we used to bring back in our baskets and show them at home the next day. And then I would take it back and show the same thing the following day.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Then at the age of twelve to thirteen I was admitted to Gadong Monastery. Unlike many other monasteries, this monastery did not have any estates and fields. It depended mainly on the patronage and prayer services sponsored by the Tibetan Government. The protector deity or Chökyong [Tib. ཆོས་སྐྱོང] was supposed to be the Dalai Lama's guardian or the chief dharma protector. Both <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] and Gadong Monastery were protector deities. Therefore, except for depending on such prayer services and offerings, the Gadong Monastery had no other sources of income to support itself and there was a limit of the number of monks which was set at 50.   

**Q:**  You mean at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. As the monastery was not well-off economically, the younger monks and novices had to do a lot of young monk work-taxes or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöntrel</a> [Tibt gzhon khral] in addition to reading scriptures. Then after some time one had to memorize the scriptures and later recite them from memory in front of the teacher or the assembly. What one had learned in a year had to be recited from memory in the assembly. While the other monks had their tea and thugpa, we had to continue to recite.   

**Q:**  Was it quite tough?   

**A:**  If you got stuck and someone helped you and if the monk discipline official came to know, then you would get a beating.   

**Q:**  Oh, my god.   

**A:**  So one had to be able to recite everything by oneself. In the first place, the reason why I became a monk was that there was nobody willing to join the Gadong Monastery, and so the Local Government [of the Dalai Lama] levied a monk tax called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] wherein each family in the locality or district had to make one of its sons a monk.   

**Q:**  As a tax?   

**A:**  Like one from a place called Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང], and another from Tsomey [Tib. མཚོ་སྨད] and a third from Dongkar Sango [Tib. གདོང་དཀར་གསང་སྒོ] and then myself. we were all a part of the trachag.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  This <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> was levied everywhere. Such monks like ourselves had to learn scriptures besides doing all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöntrel</a> in the monastery. Then later on, we were taught to play the large and smaller trumpets and the Gyaling [Tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] clarinet-like instrument. This was taught only after we had learned to read scriptures and texts.   

**Q:**  Was this taught in the morning when the reciting was over?   

**A:**  Yes. In the day time we practiced blowing trumpets and in the morning and evening we had to memorize scriptures/ religious texts. That is what we used to do.   

**Q:**  Did they teach all the monks to play the trumpet?   

**A:**  Generally, it was taught to all, but it was very difficult learning how to blow it. The only privilege one got for doing that was that one could get <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> to drink.   

**Q:**  I see, you were allowed to drink <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, we were allowed to drink chang. We could drink surreptitiously.   

**Q:**  Did noone say anything if you were found out?   

**A:**  Noone said anything even if you were found out. So in the beginning, they blocked the mouthpiece of the trumpet to make you blow.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  When you were good enough at that -- say about fifteen days later, the trumpet was placed on a stand facing towards the edge or wall of a cliff. Then the blockage at the mouth piece was removed.   

**Q:**  The trumpet was placed on the edge?   

**A:**  Yes, then this part of one's lip cracked.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  You had to blow this way.You must not put or use both lips like this. It was really difficult. We barely had enough <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> to eat. All we had was a small triangle shaped bag of tsamba called monks' prayer assembly bag or tsogkhug [Tib. ཚོགས་ཁུག].   

**Q:**  It was only a hand-span in length?   

**A:**  Yes, you had to manage the whole day on this.   

**Q:**  Did you bring <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> from home?   

**A:**  No, our teacher fed us. So that is how it was when we learned to play trumpets. Our lips cracked completely.   

**Q:**  Oh, my God.   

**A:**  Our lips had to be healed [while blowing] in the mouthpiece of the trumpets.   

**Q:**  Did your lips become cracked?   

**A:**  They became very sore and a sort of white stuff like ligaments also came out.   

**Q:**  Oh, God!   

**A:**  Once your lips were chapped and sore it was very difficult. You could not sleep at night. You lay down then touched your lips against the cold wall like this repeatedly. And then you had to keep on playing until the lips were healed. Once one had mastered playing trumpets, then he would have to play to report or receive the spirits into the mediums [Tib. སྙན་སེང] before they fall into trance. On such occasions you had to play in three series -- a first, second and third. After having completed all three, the oracle fell into trance. The only privilege we got was that we would be introduced to learn the dance trumpet for the religious dance,the chamdung [Tib. འཆམ་དུང] .   

**Q:**  What is the dance trumpet?   

**A:**  This is the trumpet that accompanies a religious dance [Tib. འཆམ].   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So to play the dance trumpet, you had to follow a sort of drawing which is like music notes. It is actually a drawing not like other writings. So you had to play according to that. We had to play the dance trumpet on the second day of the Losar(Tibetan New Year).   

**Q:**  Did the dance take place in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, in the monastery and it took the whole day. But before that, we had a practice and rehearsal of the religious dance [Tib. འཆམ་སྦྱང] for about a week.   

**Q:**  Was it done without costumes?   

**A:**  Yes, for about a week it was done without any costumes, just in our usual monks robes. We had to accompany the dance with the small and big trumpets. Then finally on the second day of (Losar), the Tibetan New Year <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཆམ] A religious prayer dance performed by monks.">cham</a> dance would take place.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  That day we had to play for the whole day.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  You see, the courtyard was like this and there were balconies. Under the balconies, we occupied places close to a rooms. There we kept Tibetan beer.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  Then, in between the dances, we drank <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a>, and then again went back to play.   

**Q:**  Was the Tibetan beer rovided from your homes?   

**A:**  Yes. From our homes and also from some acquaintances since this was a special day. It had become a custom. In this way, we played trumpets the whole day on the second day of New Year. And on the third day, we performed at the competititon of the oracles falling into trance with deities [Tib. ལྷ་སྡུར] where the oracles of the local deities [Tib. ཡུལ་ལྷ] and other oracles of the birth deities [Tib. སྐྱེས་ལྷ] would attend.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Then the oracle would go into trance with the protector deity followed by the competition of the oracles. In the morning, they would perform the leading performance [Tib. རུ་འདྲེན]   

**Q:**  What was the leading dance?   

**A:**  It was a precession of the Acharya, Skeletons, Hashang Gyalpo [Tib. ཧ་ཤང་རྒྱལ་པོ], Panditas and many others. Then the competition of oracles and after that, Gadong Oracle will fall into trance and go around the monastery and then they will perform the religious dance. The four trumpeters were also responsible to dance the skeleton and the Pandita dance.   

**Q:**  How many monks altogether participated in the religious dance?   

**A:**  There were many type of dances, but not many people. In each group there were only five, six or seven and at the most only eight dancers.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So in Gadong we had many varieties of dances performed, whereas in Tsurphu Karmapa's [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ་ཀར་མ་པ] Monastery, they had a whole lot of monks, about fifty dancers, partiipated in one type of dance. that This included all the spirits and deities, et cetera. Everyone did the same steps accompanied by drums. It was a drum dance, [Tib. རྔ་འཆམ] with no trumpets.   

**Q:**  Was it called drum dance?   

**A:**  Yes, a dance accompanied by drum. It was simply the whole day. With each beat of drums, the dancers lifted their feet. Here we have the dance with trumpets [Tib. དུང་འཆམ] which is very fast and active. In Kyomolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང] another monastery, there is also a trumpet dance. So is there one in Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] Monastery. Then after being there a few years, I separated from my teacher's room [Tib. ཤག], and moved into my own room. We were very naughty then. There was a celebration called the bathing picnic or chabshug, [Tib. ཆབ་ཞུགས ] which was usually somewhere in the last month of the autumn season. It was in the seventh month of the Tibetan calendar.   

**Q:**  Yes, it was.   

**A:**  Well, around the end of the seventh month or the beginning of the eighth month we usually did the chabshug.   

**Q:**  What is chabshug?   

**A:**  This is an occasion for the monasteries to have picnics. I admit we were naughty. At the end of the chabshug, we made offerings of incense and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> by throwing up the tsamba into the air.   

**Q:**  Then you shouted, "May the Gods be victorious." [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ་འཐེན]   

**A:**  Yes, as we boys were very naughty, we picked up a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and threw it at each other. In my group, there were three of us, but now both of them are not anymore in this world. One of them even joined the revolt. He was from a place called Sangmo [Tib. བཟང་མོ] and the other was from the Gadong area. As you see, next to the County seat there is the fourth <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུག; རུ་ཁག; ch. 队] A large administrative unit in Tibetan communes that consisted of several villages. The full name for brigade was &quot;production brigade&quot; (tib. ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁང; ch. 生产队), although most Tibetans just used the abbreviation &quot;ruga.&quot; In Tibet, communes/brigades were initiated primarily in the late 1960s.">brigade</a> or rukhag. He was from there. So the three of us were the main culprits. As we were throwing up tsamba as offerings, it got into the eyes of the most senior monk sitting in the first row and we were punished.   

**Q:**  Oh my.   

**A:**  We were made to do prostrations during the entire prayer assembly from the beginning until the end.   

**Q:**  Oh my.   

**A:**  So then we could not tolerate this sort of punishment, and we ran away from the monastery.   

**Q:**  You ran away.   

**A:**  Before doing that, we had to get prepared with getting some layman's dress or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> [Tib. སྐྱ་ཆས] in place of our monks' robes.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  This way we got ready and then one day when myself with the little older monks were beating the drums sitting in the front row of the prayer assembly hall.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  My friends, the other two boys, were on the other side playing trumpets. Then one day we made off. The boy from Gadong was ready at Gadong itself. And the one who was from Sangmo and myself contacted each other and then when we had made all the preparation, we fled one night.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. Where did you run away to?   

**A:**  We could not go far. At first we planned to go to India. We were then only children. After leaving the monastery, we stopped down at the Gadong gorges, took off the monks' robes and put on the laymens' <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>, and then we went further down to where you could see the present County Primary School [Ch. xian xiao xue].   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. That school.   

**A:**  Those days there used to be a ruin with some willows and other trees. That place used to be called Yakag. We spent the night there and got up very late the next morning.   

**Q:**  Oh my.   

**A:**  And further down, we reached Namkha Ngöshi [Tib. ནམ་མཁའ་དངོས་གཞི] where the present county seat is located. It used to be the Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> Trekhang's [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] house. We passed that house and then the house of a type of healer who sucked out bad things [Tib. འཇིབ་རྒྱག་མཁན], and beyond that, there was a stream and we were thinking to wash ourselves thefre. We took off our boots and then far away on the Trisam [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ] Bridge we saw a monk walking along.   

**Q:**  Oh.   

**A:**  Later we came to know that monks had been sent to stop us at Dongkar Shogo [Tib. གདོང་དཀར་ཤོ་སྒོ] and the Trisam Bridge. We did not go up to the other side.   

**Q:**  That is right; you could have gone up the hillside.   

**A:**  Well, then we proceeded towards where the present County Granary office called "Manufacture Factry" [Ch. jia gong chang] is located.   

**Q:**  Yes, that was near Trisam.   

**A:**  We were talking to each other saying that it is strange that there is a monk over there. Then as we walked towards the bridge, there usually were many muleteers and donkey herders. We told ourselves that those people were pointing and looking around. It seemed that they were people from the monastery. As we approached the bridge there were three monks there.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  Well, then we told ourselves that if we came across or confronted anyone on the Trisam Bridge, let us throw our luggage and toss the monks into the river.   

**Q:**  Oh.   

**A:**  In those days, the old bridge used to be there. Before we could step onto the Trisam Bridge we were going on the small bridge near that, and the people looking for us were already getting near to us so we put our loads down against a wall. When they asked us where we were going, we told them that we were running away. Then they asked where to?   

**Q:**  I see. And then?   

**A:**  We told them that if we live in Tibet where there are wooden doors/gates [Tib. བོད་ཤིང་སྒོ་བཙུགས་ས], we would not be able to escape, therefore we made up our mind to go to India where there are metal doors/gates [Tib. རྒྱ་ལྕགས་སྒོ་བཙུགས་ས]. This was just child's talk, with us pretending as if we were going to reach a great place. They asked us not to do such a thing, but to return to the monastery. By then they had already send messages to the group who were blocking the main road in Dongkar Shogo. Those people also joined us. They all insisted that we go back and said our parents would be worried and the teachers would face difficulties. It was no use running off like that, they said, and then we all walked up towards the monastery. My house was on the way.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  One of the monks who had been sent to stop us was a distant relative of mine and on the way, we went to his house.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  He went to my house while we stopped at a household that was in charge of looking after a marshy area [Tib. འདམ་སྲུང་བ] that belonged to Lhalu. It was a single house with a few trees and we stopped there. They brought a little tea and a leather pouch with tsamba. In those days there were no thermos flasks. Then, in the meantime, my father also arrived.   

**Q:**  He did?   

**A:**  He said it was very bad to run away like that. It was a disgrace to the monastery and you were not thinking about your parents' difficulties and you did not even show consideration and respect for your teachers and so on.   

**Q:**  And then.   

**A:**  You know, we had nothing else to bring with us [as food] but dry <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> offerings. You see, my teacher was a caretaker of the protector deity's chapel that was called a gompo [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བ]. The older or senior monks had to do this by turns. With the income from that, one had to sponsor a day's religious function or rites for the whole monastery. After that, the caretaker would become bankrupt. He was virtually a beggar then. He was up to his neck in debts, because the monastery had no permanent sources of income.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  According to tradition, this endowment was started by a family named Kyarpo Phutugtsang [Tib. སྐྱར་པོ་བུ་ཕྲུག྄་ཚང] in those good eras. They were from here in this village. But the endowment that they left in the olden days, was not sufficient.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  The family left two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> and five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 毛] A Chinese currency unit. 10 maotse = 1 yuan. 10 fen = one maotse.">maotse</a> which is equivalent to one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> of the old Tibetan monetary system. With the interest from that, one was supposed to sponsor the function -- a religious rite et cetera for one day. You had to provide Bagtsa Marku [Tib. བག་ཚ་མར་ཁུ] which was flour lumps with sugar and butter as well as butter tea. Once you completed your turn of being the caretaker or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a>, then one was sunk in debt. So at the time when we ran away, we had only dry <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> to carry. We ate those and had black tea and stayed there the whole day. In the evening, we were taken to the monastery and my teacher scolded me very badly. We were the little older students who did not stay with the teacher, but were entrusted to other senior students. As soon as we arrived, the teacher told us, "I hope you are not tired."   

**Q:**  Ah, ah, then?   

**A:**  What to say? We just kept quiet. We were not punished then.   

**Q:**  What was the main reason for your running away?   

**A:**  It was like this. One had to memorize scriptures from texts and also play trumpets and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] A clarinet type of wind instrument played by monks in religious services.">gyaling</a> clarinets. On the whole, life was very difficult.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  When the senior monks went out to perform religious rites in the villages and towns [Tib. གྲོང་ཆོག་རྒྱུག], we would be taken along only if there were not enough monks, otherwise not.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Of course, one was expected to know the various chants and rites and also to make offering <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> et cetera.   

**Q:**  That must be.   

**A:**  One was also expected to be able to make <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a>, and its decorations of butter and be able to perform the rites and beat the drums and cymbals. All these one needed to know. So unless they took you out of the monastery for such things, there was nothing interesting. In the monastery itself there was nothing much. That is why we got together and planned to flee. Being a monk there, we did not have to worry much about our livelihood, but boys at our age have good appetites and we used to get only a measure of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> which was not enough at all. Sometimes, when we got butter tea we eat shagpag[Tib. ཞག་སྤགས], that is we mixed tsamba with the left over butter in the tea cup. As such, we used to finish all the tsamba in the morning itself.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  That was how it was and then one day the three of us went to attend the religious function called Jongyu [Tib. ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ] where the monks went to far away places.   

**Q:**  Is that the name of a place?   

**A:**  It was held in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, the summer palace of the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama preached there. We went there without permission and were punished on our return. Jongyu is a religious tradition, a traditional religious rite, and we were punished.   

**Q:**  Oh, no.   

**A:**  We were made to prostrate and were treated very badly and still some were not satisfied. So we discussed among ourselves that since I was the oldest among the three of us, most likely they would beat me first. If they did, I asked my friends to leave at once and I will follow you.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  In the prayer assembly hall, the head discipline officer, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> [Tib. དགེ་སྐོས] beat me with his yellow stick/rod [Tib. སེར་རྒྱུག] in the front row. This yellow rod is not actually for beating. It is hung up just for display. So he used that on me.   

**Q:**  It was not be to used, was it?   

**A:**  No. There were other things like (horse) whips [Tib. རྟ་ལྕག] and senjag [Tib. སན྄་ལྕག]. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> was the student of the senior monk into whose eyes we threw <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, so he had a grudge against us.   

**Q:**  Oh!   

**A:**  He hit me two or three times on my head. It was just after I had my meal and I nearly vomitted.   

**Q:**  Oh, my God!   

**A:**  Then I got up at once and so did the other two. And we ran away.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  At first we went to Sera Chubsang [Tib. སེ་ར་ཆུ་བཟང] Monastery. Nobody knew where we had gone. There we stayed at the Chubsang Monastery.   

**Q:**  What did you do?   

**A:**  We stayed there and memorized scriptures. Then the Chinese Government gave alms to the Three Great Monastic Seats. This was from Zhongyang (China) and the alms were given in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> silver coins.   

**Q:**  Then   

**A:**  Then we went to a campsite where yak hair tents [Tib. སྦྲ་གུར] were pitched in front of Sera. This is where the garage is at present.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  We went to the tents and then to the monastery and tried to get alms. For this, we needed to get a monk's cloak during the prayer assembly. No alms were given without this cloak. We somehow managed to get two cloaks for three persons.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Since we were from smaller branch monasteries [Tib. གཞིས་དགོན་པ] we wore a sort of blouse, so we took that off and then we wore the brocade vest [Tib. གོས་ཆེན་སྟོད་འགག] turning it inside out and went to get the alms from the Sera General Prayer Assembly. Everyone even, those in the yak hair tent camps, were talking about going to get the alms given by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  So we went there to the prayer meeting at the Sera Monastery. I shared my cloak with the smaller boy as we had only two cloaks for three persons.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  In the morning, at first the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> trader called Jamatsang [Tib. བྱ་མ་ཚང] gave alms.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes they wre doing big business.   

**A:**  That family were doing very big businessman from Lhasa. They were Khambas from eastern Tibet. He gave alms of three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> to each monk and then Zhongyang gave a flag to the prayer assembly and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> silver coin to each individual monk. We were really scared, for we saw there were some monks walking up and down the aisles with sticks in their hands. You see, we did not belong to that monastery, but driven by desperation we had landed up there [they just went in and sat down to get the alms].   

**Q:**  Did they find out?   

**A:**  Not at that time when seated, but then we had to get in a line to receive the alms. I shared ae cloaks with the small boy monk); we each had half of it covering ourselves.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  As soon as we received the alms, he [the smaller boy] dropped the cloak and ran away.   

**Q:**  Why? Did they discover you?   

**A:**  Yes, they did because of the smaller boy. Then we went out and stayed at the yak hair tent camp, had tea, and then we spent some days there. At that time one, of the teachers came to know this and dropped in to tell us that the Gadong Monastery would not take any action against us. He had already appealed, and so now we should return. He was the teacher of the small boy.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  We told him that from the very first, we had been punished for nothing. We did not throw the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> deliberately on anyone. All the monks were throwing tsamba and then for going to the Jongyu, but we were punished. Therefore, we were not going to stay at all [in Gadong].   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  He asked where we were going.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  We told that we had not made up our minds where to go, but would stay here for the time being. Then the teacher went back leaving behind some food for us. That is then when we had really thought of running away.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  After leaving Chubsang, we made our way to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི]. We then sought divination from the goddess [Tib. ལྷ་མོ] Trapchi Lhamo [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་ལྷ་མོ] by shaking many small bamboo pieces in a container called a trochen [Ch. chou qian] asking whether to run away or bring a case against the Gadong monastery.   

**Q:**  Ah!   

**A:**  Children have funny ideas. Then the divination said not to make a case, but to flee. So that was what came out of the divination.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes.   

**A:**  So again we went to Ramoche [Tib. རྭ་མོ་ཆེ], the cathedral in Lhasa, and at the chapel of the Longevity Buddha Amitaba called Tsephag Lhakang [Tib. ཚེ་དཔག་ལྷ་ཁང] we again sought a trochen divination in the chapel. Is it still there?   

**Q:**  Yes, it is there.   

**A:**  It is the temple where people perform circumambulation. So there we sought a trochen divination and got the same answer. So then we decided to run away. We stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Nyingpa [Tib. rmr ru rnying pa] [monastery] for some days. There, one of my friends had an acquaintance who was a monk before but had lost his celibacy and was then a layman. At that time, there was an Amala (lady) from Sangmo, a very capable woman, so she came to the house.   

**Q:**  Was she the mother of other monk?   

**A:**  Yes. She came and told us that it was not the right thing what we were doing and told us to go back. She said we had caused much trouble to our parents and teachers. We told her that we were not going, but she finally made us go back with her.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  As we approached a place called Gyantse where some villages were merged together, we made our beds under some willows in preparation for spending the night. We were dying to run away again. You see, this friend of mine from Sangmo was really a naughty boy. When the Amala (lady) asked what we were really not satisfied with at the monastery and if we desired fields to cultivate, cattle to plough the field or ones' own houses and farms, the one from Sangmo answered,"To live in the monastery, one has to be celibate." In other words he meant to say that we had violated our celibacy vows.   

**Q:**  Yes, then?   

**A:**  The Amala said, "No, you are telling lies," and so she took us back. On the way, I was handed over to my house. The other boys she took directly to the monastery. So once again we were back in the monastery.   

**Q:**  You were back again.   

**A:**  There was no way to escap, let alone make a case against the monastery. They somehow seemed to find us. Besides, we had not been able to run far away. It was only between Chubsang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Nyingpa. That is how very difficult it was to get away. Even if we had made a case, we would have never won. It was just a childish notion.   

**Q:**  Yes, you could not have won.   

**A:**  So, in this way, we must have spent almost seven or eight years more living in the monastery.   

**Q:**  In Gadong Monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. During those years we did the religious dances, memorized scriptures from texts, played trumpets et cetera. Then you see, there is the prophecy of the protector deity which someone has to receive. The points of the questions are written, but someone has to read them out to the oracle which is like asking questions. So I was appointed for this post.   

**Q:**  The post or duty of reading the questions to the oracle, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Well, I had never been to a school and whatever very little I had learned was just casual by praticing letters by putting some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> in my wooden bowl and writing on it.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  To read the question for the prophecy to the oracles was a very serious matter.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Usually it is done by someone like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and a gerpa. So they would request, "Please may you oracle be heard." Then whatever prophecy the protector deity gives, the secretary writes it down on a message board or samdra [Tib. སམ་ཁྲ]. The deity gave the prophecy through the oracle in the sound of a horse neighing.   

**Q:**  You mean it made the sound of a horse neighing?   

**A:**  Yes. You needed someone who knew this. It was jotted down on message board.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  Then it was transferred or copied on to a piece of paper. So I was given the duty to read the question to the oracles. I had no sponsor or patron, so the people at my home and my brother, my late brother who was at the Drepung Monastery, we had a discussion, so I tricked them.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  There was someone who had been to school and studied.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  I got him; I sort of hired him to do this in my place and I went to the Gadong Monastery and to Phenpo Nalenda [Tib. འཕན་པོ་ན་ལེན་དྲ] to get the training for this.   

**Q:**  Nalenda?   

**A:**  Yes, to the Nalenda Monastery. I told was going to get training and study. Monks were trained there. So I said I was going to Phenpo.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  My brother and family had already sought permission for me to leave. The only privilege for reading the questions for the prophecy was that one got extra alms. If the general or common monks got one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> he got two. Besides that, now and then he got a sort of tip. For lay people, it was usually called the cost of the Tibetan beer [Tib. ཆང་རིན], but for a monk, we referred to it as to buy bread [Tib. བཞེས་བག་གཟིགས་ཡས]. Some individuals who want to know their prophecy quicker, would give some extra money to expedite the matter.   

**Q:**  By the family.   

**A:**  Yes, the one which had asked for the prophecy. So I hired someone [to do this] and went to Lhasa. My late brother was in Drepung's Kongpo Khamtsen, and he sent me to Lhoka (southern Tibet). The patron of the Kongpo Khamtsam was a Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> named Kyaping [Tib. སྐྱབས་དབྱིངས]. They were Tibetan government officials. So officially, the Lhoka Dzong was given to Kyaping. As a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a>, Kyaping was sent a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> from the Kongpo Khamtsam. So I was sent there with a letter from Chandzö Linga in Lhasa to Jedeshol [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ] by coracle, following the main course of the river.   

**Q:**  You sailed down the river?   

**A:**  Yes, where there was strong current and waves and the coracle shook like this.   

**Q:**  Quite scary.   

**A:**  Yes, but as we sailed down where the river in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང་ཆུ] and the river in the central Tibet [Tib. དབུས་ཆུ] would meet in Gongkar, around where the airport is at present, the boat could not move much. There were at first splashes of water on the side of the boat and it could not sail fast because of the wind and the place was not that steep.   

**Q:**  The water was very still and there was no current?   

**A:**  Yes, that is right. On landing at Lhoka, I took my belongings and inquired at a place called Jedeshol [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ]. I was told that there were two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, one that was located in the upper part of the valley which was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Shöl [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཞོལ] and other located in the lower part. Have you then been there?   

**Q:**  Yes, I have been there.   

**A:**  There was a small estate there belonging to a family called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང]. They had a child who had been send to the Dzong's school. The lady of the house told me that since there were too many servants here, I should go to an estate called Lhünpo Estate in Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན]. So I went there. That family had two or three horses and I was told to look after them.   

**Q:**  Like a stable boy.   

**A:**  Yes, as a stable boy, and then this family owed a debt to a certain family in Lhasa. The donkey herder was sent to Lhasa to deliver barley. I was sent along as a supervisor, riding a horse. We then crossed the Bentsa [Tib. བན་རྩ] Ferry site and went over the Sherong Chela [Tib. ཤེ་རོང་བྱེ་ལ] mountain pass and went towards Lhasa. On the way there, there used to be a stupa which is not there now. It was near Ramoche (cathedral). Opposite that, there was a house with doors facing towards the east. So we handed over the barley over there. Then, at that time behind Wangkhang [Tib. དབང་ཁང] I had a relative and so I went to enquire there.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  As there were people travelling to and from my place, I sent messages to my house asking my father to come.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  The next day my father arrived and I asked him what had happened [with the Gadong monastery]. He said the matter was still not resolved.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  So in this way I returned.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  Yes, to Lhoka, but then I got a message saying that everything had been settled. A monk had been admitted as my replacement and my membership in the Gadong Monastery had been withdrawn. Later, I returned home. Then there were some neighboring families who had asked for me to be given as their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> [matrilocal residing bridegroom), because I was then neither a monk nor a layman [Tib. སྐྱ་མན་སྲིད་མན] .   

**Q:**  Well then.   

**A:**  At first my parents took no heed. One family especially who begged for me was my present wife's house. They had many brothers and sisters -- a big family. However, at the time my parents intended to make me a monk. And I even wanted to become a monk. Eventually we decided that I would join e Drepung Monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you become a monk again after coming back?   

**A:**  Yes. Everything had been settled with my old monastery, so what was the problem in me taking other initiatives?   

**Q:**  Of course.   

**A:**  So I became a monk, but my teacher went to Phenpo. The teacher who feed me. He stayed in Sharbumpa [Tib. ཤར་བུམ་པ]. He took me there and left me as a servant at an estate called Phenpo Jangyab [Tib. ལྕང་རྒྱབ].   

**Q:**  I see, once again this was done by your teacher.   

**A:**  Yes. to Jangyab estate, was sent as a servant.   

**Q:**  After you joined the Drepung Monastery was there anything between you and the Gadong Monastery?   

**A:**  I stayed there, but did not like it at all. The person in charge of the estate was an ex-servant of Lhalu. It was customary that when a servant became rich, he was sent to run some poor estates. So he was like that.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  Prior to this, he had stayed in Kongpo. He had dry walnuts and peaches to be sold and he made me sell them and do the cooking for him. I was dying to get away; I did not like to stay.   

**Q:**  When you were told to sell those things the work load must have been much less, was it not?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Probably you had less burden?   

**A:**  Yes, my main duty was to sell the walnuts and the peaches when customers came and then prepare the meals for him. That was all. But I did not like to stay. Then one day I told him that I did not like to stay and to take me to my teacher as I did not know the way. Then when I met my teacher, he asked me why I had come back. I told him I did not like to stay there and that I would rather go home and stay with my mother. I also told him that I did not need the key for my room. I would come only to collect my salary and alms, and then stay with my mother. I said,"I am going to be the pupil of my mother [Tib. ཨ་མའི་དགེ་ཕྲུག]". [ Note: this was kind of sarcastic nickname for those "monks" who stay home and go to the monastery only to get alms and salary from the monastery]   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  My teacher did not agree. I told him there were no other alternatives.   

**Q:**  So?   

**A:**  Eventually I was allowed to return home. When I arrived, I found out that a case had been made against us.   

**Q:**  Oh, for what?   

**Q:**  Gadong Monastery still insisted that I belonged to them. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> of the Dongkar area was given to Gadong and the dzongpön was a monk from my monastery. He was the one who was my teacher.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  Well, then the case started. But before going home directly, on my way I dropped in to a relative's house who lived in the house called Langkhang [Tib. གླང་ལྷང] that belonged to Tsarong. It was they who first told me about the case in Dongkar Dzong and the petition filed at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> office. That was the time when Dalai Lama went to China [1954-55]. I mean the present one. So with regards to the case, there was no way to avoid the confrontation. However, we had settled everything with Gadong Monastery before, so it was like the Tibetan proverb "The dog has not left behind it's tail where it has slept." [Tib. ཁྱི་ཉལ་སར་གཞུ་གུ་ལུས་མེད] I said if they wished to go to court, I was ready.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  I put on a pair of old worn out boots since otherwise, the dress I was wearing was too neat.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  The boots belonged to my late uncle. I put on a dark brown <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and set off to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> office. Those days the offices were in Potala and so I had to go there. We were given an appointment. So the Yigtsang was held in Potala.   

**Q:**  Yes, probably those days it was.   

**A:**  There at that time there was an Acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> lived in Tsomnling Metog Jangseb [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང་མེ་ཏོག་ལྕང་གསེབ]], as the trunyichemmo had accompanied the Dalai Lama to China. So there was someone in his place. To see him personally my family members took eggs etcetera to his place to bribe him. I did not know who he was then. At last, a time was set to submit our petitions. On the first day all our petitions were taken at the door. We had to lay all our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> at the doorsteps.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  I don't know how it was reported or what was said inside, we just returned after that. Then we were given another appointment. That day both the parties had to kneel on the floor [Tib. པུས་མོ་གཡས་འཛུགས་གཡོན་འཛུགས] and we had to appeal.   

**Q:**  Oh, my God!   

**A:**  My religious name then was Ngawang Chögyal [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཆོས་རྒྱལ]. As we entered the room we had to take off our caps and shawls then kneel on the floor after laying the scarves on the floor.   

**Q:**  Strange, that was the custom.   

**A:**  Yes, all the officials were seated there on a raised sort of platform and tables were laid.   

**Q:**  Were they seated in a line?   

**A:**  Yes. They said, "Are you Ngawang Chögyal?"   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  They said, "Gadong Monastery wants you back, so you must return." Then I told them, I didn't leave anything like the proverb, "The dog has not left it's where it slept." Even if I am tied down I shall never stay in Gadong. As for money and grains, I have paid for and have withdrawn my name and left a replacement monk and I have settled everything. So at the best, please do it like the Tibetan proverb,"Though the stupa turns upside down, the layers still remain in the middle." [Tib. མཆོད་རྟེན་མགོ་མཇུག་ལོག་ཀྱང། བང་རིམ་སྐེད་པར་གནས]. This is what I told.   

**Q:**  Ah! Ah! Ah!   

**A:**  I was only 23 or 24 when I knew quite a bit about how to go about.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  After I said that they still insisted that I must go back to Gadong. Then they asked Gadong whether it was true and they said yes. Then the officials asked [the other partner], "Why was the past matter stirred up again?" [Tib. རྙོག་མ་གཏིང་སློང] however, they told me that I must go back once and then I told them I have decided against going back and from their honorable desk that I be issued a permit to this affect. I also told that I am loyal to the Tibetan Government and had served as a monk in lieu of tax but from this day I shall discard monk's robes.   

**Q:**  And?!   

**A:**  Still they told that I should go back. After I left the hall with my refusal to go back, the case was still not resolved. I had no monastery then.   

**Q:**  Did they eventually find ways to settle the case?   

**A:**  Not at all. They repeatedly asked me to go back to Gadong, but I rejected. So at last the Gadong Monastery could not have me and I could not belong to any monastery. So that was how the matter remained unresolved.   

**Q:**  I see!   

**A:**  These days one realizes life is really much better and happier. After that I returned to Lhasa and remained a sort of lay person (took off robes). I tried to join in the house construction as a labourer but it was difficult because plasturer master [Tib. ཞལ་དཔོན] wanted us to bribe them. Otherwise, she didn't admit us. Then I started running errands and working as a porter. I got a rope and waited outside the Chinese offices and shops which were not many those days. I earned seven to eight <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> a day.   

**Q:**  In a day, for carrying luggage and things?   

**A:**  Yes, if you carry a rope, people just call you. Then I met one of the Tsarong family's servant, a driver. Those days the Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> used to have cars. Tsarong had a car and a truck and a motor bike. All those were brought on horseback and then assembled because there were no motorable roads then between India and Tibet. This Tsarong servant brought a horse cart and a mule. I was hired as the driver.   

**Q:**  How did you come to be in Tsarong?   

**A:**  Because of my relatives in Lhasa. He lived just opposite the Tsarong house and was close to the tenants who lived there.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  But before driving the cart, I was told to tend the vegetable garden. There was a small well from which I had to water the garden when they first sowed the seeds. The seeds were covered with small clay pots.   

**Q:**  Was that to prevent the seeds from rotting?   

**A:**  No, to protect from the birds. So after a few days I drove the cart. I must have made about two or three thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> for the master. After sometime he sold the cart. I drove the cart mainly at the Chinese military camp in Drib [Tib. གྲིབ]. There was road construction going on there. I used to get meals in the camp and could as eat as much as I wanted. After the horse cart was sold, I was told that the Lhünpo Estate or in Metro Gungkar needed a helper. I asked how much they are going to pay me and they said that they will pay me 2-3 dayang per day. So I agreed and I went there.   

**Q:**  Yes?   

**A:**  With my bedding on my back and a short dagger strapped at the waist, I set off on foot. Sometimes a passing cart gave me a lift, but there were no cars those days. It took me two days and finally I reached my destination one very late night. Then they sent a servant to show me their cart. It was not a good one, had very thick tires. Anyway, I made trips for a few times. In Metro Gungkhar there are plenty of trees called Lamtser [Tib. གླ་ཚེར] (a species of Willow trees) growing up there. People say they were the hair of the diety. At the time the local people there were cutting down those trees and selling them. So I transported that.   

**Q:**  Was it to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, most of it was taken to the Chinese military camp in Lhadong Shanka [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ]. They used to pay us 70 to 80 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> for one cart load.   

**Q:**  For one cart load of wood?   

**A:**  Yes, we gave the money to Tsarong house in Lhasa because the owner was a relative of theirs. While returning we picked up some passengers and made a few coins which sometimes I gave half to the master and kept the other half for myself. So in this way the family treated me well. They fed me well and paid on time. Before I left there was a lady in the Tsarong family. She planned to buy me a big gold earring.   

**Q:**  Yes, then?   

**A:**  The Amala did business in gold. She used to be the middleman when there were deals between two rich families or individuals. She got commission. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> for each <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> or (50 sangs make one dotse).   

**Q:**  She acted as a go between, is that it?   

**A:**  Yes, so I bought an earring and left with the lady.   

**Q:**  Was that a gold earring?   

**A:**  Yes. In the meantime, I worked as a servant. At the end of each month I paid to the lady. Though I made a deal to pay within three months I might have stayed for almost five months to square my debt after I made the full payment. I got the earring and left for Lhasa. In Lhasa I stayed with relatives who did small business. I also sold chilly, boots, rock sugar and sugar which usually came in big cardboard boxes from abroad. And then my relatives' master was a clerk of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Office and he was staying in the house called Gowo Khangsar [Tib. གོ་བོ་ཁང་གསར]. I went to work for him when he went to the north butter lease [Tib. ཤེ་དཔོན].   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  Probably 24 or 25. He took me to the north [Tib. བྱང] in the eighth month (Tibetan Calendar); we went on horse back. We were one master and two servants. On the way we halted for meals but if we gave first to the master he would ask us to get ready to go as soon as he finished eating. So afterwards, we ate ourselves first and then gave to the master. In this way, we reached the Namtso [Tib. གནམ་མཚོ] area, a nomadic region. Most of the people there moved around and did not have permanent houses or settlements. It was extremely cold that when we reached the edge of the lake and when our boot lace gets loose, we just spit on it and it gets frozen and stuck. There we had to cook for the master and look after the horses and mules. To the servants they gave us a little cheese and a quarter of sheep carcass daily which was called the cheese and meat for the thugpa [Tib. ཐུག་ཤ་ཐུག་ཕྱུར], for the master he was given a whole sheep every day. All these were provided by the comm! ! unity of nomads there and was accumulated there and the food was supplied by the nomads community. We were the only ones who had to cook. There were to be no bones and the skin had to be stripped off the meat. Nowadays we ourselves get to eat meat without skins but in those days it was difficult.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  For the master we had to strip off the skin from the meat and remove all tendons. The meat had to be cut into small pieces and not chopped and add the imported Chinese flavor called Weijing [Ch. wei jing] In this way, the meat did not become a sent of meat ball when you make <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མོག་མོག] Stuffed dumplings.">momo</a> (meat dumpling). The master used to eat two or three layers of the steam container; we had to make very small momos. The people really suffered. When we reached there in the eight month, they make two offerings or presentations [Tib. མཇལ་ཞུ] one in summer and one in winter. The rich ones gave a big leather bag [Tib. ལྟང] of butter and the next ones gave square piece of butter [Tib. བདར་མ] and still the next gave a lump of butter they got from churn. Those who were really poor they went to the hills to collect wild sweet potatoes [Tib. གྲོ་མ] to present the officer.   

**Q:**  It seemed the master had plenty to carry!!   

**A:**  Yes, the presents given were not included in the tax. Then the people were made to tan the leather fur and mask. This had to be done repeatedly and finally those furs were washed with a special soap with peacock trademark that kills all the other smells. The workers did not get paid at all. And then, I was sent after the loads.   

**Q:**  So coming back were all these things loaded on animals?   

**A:**  Yes, pack animals for the transportation was provided from one station to the next [Tib. ས་ཚིགས] by the miser. The stations were Dakpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ], Damshung [Tib. འདམ་གཞུང], Nyendrong [Tib. གཉན་གྲོང], Sampasar [Tib. ཟམ་པ་གསར], Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན], Mang [Tib. རྨང] and then here and then to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were you paid the salary for working? Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> give you any thing?   

**A:**  No salary, nothing except the food and the clothes just barely to keep us warm.   

**Q:**  Did the master give you clothes?   

**A:**  No, only in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> (North) we were given fur <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>; otherwise it was too cold. As we came back I took off the fur chupa in Dechen; otherwise, if some friends saw me in the fur chupa it would look very queer and odd [Tib. ཁྱད་མཚར་པོ]. In the north, we didn't have any choice but to wear it. Then we saw how the things were stolen by the transport workers. They made holes in the leather bag and dug out the butter with spoons and ladles and replaced that with yaks dung and cowdung.   

**Q:**  Oh my!   

**A:**  Then the leather pouch loads of butter were piled up at the Teaching Grove, [Tib. གསུང་ཆོས་ར་བ] (near the Jokhang). There they were checked by officials would poke the butter loads with kind of knife-like tools and if found out the dungs they would come to us, and we in turn point out the carriers, the transport people. After we had handed over everything, the sweepers [Tib. གད་པ], would store it in the store room called Lugtshang and the leader of the sweepers called out a list for whom or for which the things were to be allocated but again much was stolen or shared among themselves. We were given just a Khel or (a measure of volumes equal to 25 to 30 pounds approximately) or two of butter, that was all. Then it was done so there were one after another who were filling their own stores and ultimately it was the common people who had to suffer and accumulated them like the proverb, "Accumulating blood and puss." [Tib. ཁྲག་གསོག་རྣག་གསོག] and provide those. Then we ! ! went to Karu a nomadic region to collect the butter leases .   

**Q:**  Where is this?   

**A:**  It is right inside this valley from where this river comes. That was the east place and then I stayed at the master's house. The master had a daughter. She was married to a lay official who was a ugly person. The girl was like a prostitute; later they got divorced.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Well, then we had to grind tobacco leaves, for snuff, the whole day.   

**Q:**  The whole day?   

**A:**  Yes, at the end of the day it became so fine it would not come off the grinder stones.   

**Q:**  It stuck to the stones because it was so fine?   

**A:**  Yes. Then in the evenings the master took his meal, said prayer, and then took snuff sitting with his wife. After that he took up the Dramyan, [Tib. སྒྲ་སྙན] a string instrument and played on and would not go to bed.   

**Q:**  Did you have to stay awake?   

**A:**  Yes, in the kitchen and serve tea to the masters.   

**Q:**  Were you scolded when something wrong?   

**A:**  No, then I lived in Lhasa selling tit-bits [Tib. ཙག་ཙིག] small items. Later I met my wife. She is the same person of which the family asked for my hand before. The first child we had expired. My wife's family had six donkeys, so in summer I went to sell grass and in winter hay. The donkeys were all mares, difficult to control. If the hay was not sold quickly the other shop-keepers would scold for making the place dirty.   

**Q:**  Where do you sell the hay?   

**A:**  In Lhasa. All the grass and hay in Lhasa came from a place known as Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]. Most people in Lhasa owned horses and mules; especially the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khampa (Khamba) sub-cultural group.">Khampa</a> or (people of eastern Tibet) businessmen or traders had scores of mules for transporting goods. When we reached the lodging in Lhasa we made three bundles out of two and sold. We had to try to sell all the grass in the morning only, otherwise the grass dried up or withered. So early in the morning whoever asked us to deliver we had to. It used to be really cold but they used to give us cups of tea. I lived there that way for some years.   

**Q:**  Were you married, then?   

**A:**  Yes, I lived with my wife's youngest brother at Wangden's house. Well, you see then in the morning when I had to load the donkeys, the mares usually were very restless. They go to eat human excrements and then I told those donkeys were like hens and cocks. This remark displeased my father-in-law. It was usually he who told everyone to get up in the morning. So we did not get along very well and I left.   

**Q:**  You broke away from the family?   

**A:**  Yes, one of my brothers was a donkey herder and lived in Lhasa. I stayed with him and helped with his work. In the meantime, we managed to borrow fifty <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> from a monastery. I could not go to my home because both my parents had expired. I with a man from Tranang [Tib. གྲ་ནང] in Lhoka district went to fair held in Trachi Champaling [Tib. གྲ་ཕྱི་བྱམས་པ་གླིང] to buy goods just carrying some cash. We bought some aprons, boots and other small items, but as we came back on the way we sold and finished off and had nothing left. Then I stayed with a distant relative in Lhasa. He used to do small business. My wife was at her own house and in the meantime my son had died and my wife's family had performed all the final rites. We resumed contact and later I went back to the family. But before returned from Lhasa, I arranged for some fields on lease and wanted to work there. At that time the revolt in Lhasa took place.   

**Q:**  Was that in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Once the revolt took place there was no chance of leaving Lhasa. I was working for the Tsarong Ex-kalön who then went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Parkhang to be the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> because of being an ex-official of the government. Since Tsarong was famous, all the members of this family were arrested and imprisoned. Only two male members in the house were left -- myself and the driver -- the rest all were women. This driver had a bayonet.   

**Q:**  Of guns?   

**A:**  Yes, everyone had locked themselves in their own houses. One day the Chinese came in and announced that all doors must be opened and when people walked around they should carry a white cloth on sticks or rods. When the Chinese soldiers came around they found the bayonet and suspected us having arms.   

**Q:**  For how long?   

**A:**  The uprising did not last long. It was just a day or two. It was mainly on the first day.   

**Q:**  Was it frightening when it started?   

**A:**  Oh, yes.   

**Q:**  You were then staying in Tsarong House in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, above Tsarong House a group of Chinese soldiers had arrived from a place known as Military Headquarters [Ch. jun qu]. There were Chinese soldiers already stationed at the Lhasa street around <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> House. There were some communication gaps and misunderstandings. These two groups started internally firing at each other's positions. Bullets rained and at times the cannons boomed and the whole place shook, even the water in the container were shaking like this, sending the things on the shelves down on the floor and breaking window panes. Quite scary. One day we heard that Ramoche or had been set on fire. I went to see but, the Ama-la (the lady of the house) advised me not to go. But I went. You see as I walked towards where the present Mentsigang Clinic is those days that place was empty, no houses. From the distant I saw a man being taken away by the soldiers. I was so scared I ran home.   

**Q:**  Were they Chinese soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes. Now then they had started arresting people. We had to remain at home. Luckily we were better off than many. Before the trouble started the Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] family's driver called Gyentsen [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན] delivered us a big leather pouch load of butter. We had good tea. But we nearly ran out of water.   

**Q:**  You had to fetch water from outside?   

**A:**  Yes, but it was impossible at the time. Luckily, the water container in the house was very big so we managed later when we opened the door. I saw a continuous flow of people taking corpses, some using hand carts with two or three corpses in and others on their backs. Everyone of them carried a stick with a small piece of white cloth attached. All the corpses were discarded into the river. The Chinese arrested many people and imprisoned them in the main Tsarong House. There were people prisoners with shoes and without. Some even did not seem to have time to put a belt on when arrested, so countless of them.   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese arresting everyone who moved arround?   

**A:**  Looked like. Afterwards the prisoners were eating in the bed pans because they were so hungry and had no other containers to use. Well, then after a few days everyone was called to the Powo Linga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག] and plain called Dalithang [Ch. da li thang] where there was the big hall to perform dance and song [Tib. ཟློས་གར].   

**Q:**  To dance?   

**A:**  Yes, they had organised dance and song groups in every locality [Tib. ས་ཁུལ]. Just before performing the dance the songs they held a big meeting at the plain Dalithang. They also held a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> against a man named Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ] of Lhalu family. He was brought into the meeting with a small leather pouch [Tib. ཐང་ཁུག] [for making bag] around his neck, and a stick in another hand. It was a very big meeting and he was displaced like that. Nowadays he is the Head of the Autonomous Region Tibet.   

**Q:**  Was that Tsewang Dorje?   

**A:**  Yes, those days he was thin. Now he has put on weight.   

**Q:**  Were you present at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, I was in Lhasa. That time after the revolt was quelled and over, we went to practice dance. There were people like the oracle of Tharpoling [Tib. དར་པོ་གླིང], Herman (a Tibetan Muslim) who was a musician and many children of the Tibetan kudrak. We were taught Nangma, a classical Tibetan dance). Many of us could not learn and it was even worse. Our knees started paining when we were taught the top dance called Khyugshe [Tib. འཁྱུག་གཞས]. Those times everywhere there were people practicing dances.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  The Chinese got everyone to practice dance and they were performing dancs everywhere. Then there was an announcement that we would be given jobs. The office was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] House (a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> family's house) and from there, I was sent to house in Dongchesur Tib. gdong rtse zur]. They asked what everyone knew. I told I could drive a cart and was sent to the Construction Office [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**Q:**  I see!   

**A:**  It was a little beyond Ramoche. Then I drove carts and lived in Lhasa for some time. At home there were wife and children and besides the field work farming to be done. So another big meeting was held and they asked how many wanted to go to their villages or houses. So I told I would like to go. If I had remained in the Contruction Office, at this time, it would have been a long time even after I retired from the office, because it was from 1959. After I came back we rented a small house just enough for two persons and then the democratic reforms took place. From the time of the time of introduction of reforms to the [Three Great] Education [Tib. སློབ་གསོ] I worked for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 乡] An administrative unit that contains several villages. It is sometimes called a rural township in the literature on China. Several xiang are part of a xian (county).">xiang</a> for a long time, but people like me were not favourably looked at by the others. We the servants of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in the old society were clean and well-dressed with used foreign clothes of the servants. So the people were unpleasant on seeing us. Some said we are servnats, but some even said I was a member of the Tsarong family but that they could not find out through investigation. However, during the ducation, I suffered loss [Tib. ཕམ་ཉེས་བཏང] a little bit.   

**Q:**  You mean during the Three Great Educations [Tib. སློབ་གསོ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ]?   

**A:**  This time it was held on the local officials [Tib. གཞི་རིམ་ལས་བྱེད་པ]. There was a man named Powo Dawa [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་ཟླ་བ]. He could not look after his children and so gave his step-son to us. We had a child but he was an elligimate child [Tib. བྱི་ཕྲུག]. So whatever the poor people said there was no way of denying or arguing. [unclear recording cannot hear the following sentence] Those who were a little better off economically were penalized and confiscated. Those who were considered poor formed their own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> and not amitted in the rukhag and were left as single [Tib. ཁེར་རྐྱང]. At that time, it was said, "It is not single, but it is profitable." [Tib. ཁེར་རྐྱང་མ་རེད། ཁེ་བཟང་རེད]. I really worked hard in the commune but we the staff got paid only half a wage that also in turns. During the education, I suffered loss.   

**Q:**  How was that?   

**A:**  For keeping the child. They said the boy's field was also owned by me. In reality, we were economically better off than many and so that might be the reason for the animosity. After the reform I had a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཛོ་མོ] A female dzo (that is a cross between a yak and a cow/ox).">dzomo</a> (a cross breed of yak and ox) which I bought for 50 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> but I was accused of embezzling [Tib. ལྐོག་ཟ] the dzomo   

**Q:**  Oh, no!   

**A:**  I could prove the person named Yeshe [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེ], a butcher from whom I bought the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཛོ་མོ] A female dzo (that is a cross between a yak and a cow/ox).">dzomo</a>, was staying in the locality. He knew how much I paid him for the dzomo (female of Dzo). So on for two accounts, I was defeated. They raided my house. I told that they could take everything but there must be constitutionally some protection which would allow me to survive on. I had a very good woollen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> made from the sheep's neck wool [Tib. སྐེ་བལ], an ox and a cow. All these were confiscated by converting them into some amount of money. [Tib. དངུལ་གྱི་རྩིས་འདྲ་པོ་སྐོར].   

**Q:**  Did they all go to the Government?   

**A:**  Not really. It seemed they were paid to someone to maintain silence. So one or two years before the Communes were dissolved I resigned from my duty/work, because I had many children then -- six. I managed to send them all to school. Besides that, one had to maintain a standard position in the society. One had to have a proper house with furniture to live in and then a proper dress to wear and things to eat and drink. All these had to be looked after. Two of my children who passed out from the university are now working. My elder son joined the Army and is now working in the broadcasting messages. Another girl is a teacher in Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང] Qu. The next boy is married and we wanted him to stay at the house and look after us, but he wanted to live separately and so I gave him that house with everything inside and a pair of carpets. He was a carpenter. Then I opened a restaurant, that side.   

**Q:**  You mean on the roadside there?   

**A:**  Yes. This year I got a plot of land next to the bridge among the Willow (trees). The first house is mine, out of those. There I built a house. Everything is done except white washing and painting; because of the weather it has been delayed, otherwise, I'm thinking to move over. One of my daughters is selling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a>. One of the boys is a farmer. We two couples own a farming land of seven mu, a little more than four mu we leased to my wife's younger brother and now we look after the remaining that we reaped only a few days back. Well, way before I opened the restaurant and chang shop, I with my brothers, those of them worked in the quarry to break rocks. After that I started selling chang. Then my daughter build a house and I supervised that. I made a back door. A room with the area of two pillars support was made for my daughter's quarters or living room. I told my daughter that for the time being I would sell chang but later they could do what they liked. I made a good profit with the sale of chang, but now I make offerings and prayers at the Three Great Monastic Seats and visit them. Besides, a lama, Rinpoche also preaches in Drepung, so this chang business and the religious practice do not go together, so I left the chang business and spent my time in the construction of our houses. In the beginning the house that the government gave us was only an area of one pillar supported room. I didn't take the house given in the reform and the rukhag. I have extended and reconstructed that. Now it is easy to add one floor.   

**Q:**  Yes, I see that.   

**A:**  But now we two are old and have not much time. Thinking to sell the houses and our children told us not to work and move out to stay with the children, sons and daughters, but my wife does not agree saying the each child have their partners, so we will not get along together. My daughter is working in the broadcast office and youngest son who passed the university is now working in the Tagste [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ]. One of my daughter is a teacher of the Party School [Tib. དང་྾ཨིཨཨོ] and her husband was a mixbreed of Tibetan and the Chinese who is working in the Water Supply Office [Tib. ཆུ་བེད་ཇུ] and his father came to Tibet in the early times.   

**Q:**  He must have been be a member of the 18th Army?   

**A:**  Probably yes.   

**Q:**  Yes, you could live happily with your children. For you there was no need to worry about them any more.   

