# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0215.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shakapba, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 W.D. Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] was a very prominent aristocratic government official who held the rank of Tsipön. He is the author of "Tibet: A Political History." In this interview, he describes how the drungtsi operated between the Kashag and the Tsondu. Shakabpa tells about how the Deshib Office headed by Bumtang and Namseling spied on the Communist and Guomindang Chinese and how the government expelled them with the agreement of the Tsondu. Shakabpa describes in detail the Tsondu meeting that was held to show gratitude to Reting for his recognizing the reincarnation of the new Dalai Lama and how Lukhangwa confronted the abbots of the great monasteries at this meeting saying that the Tsondu should not offer government estates to Reting as a reward. He discusses how Dombor attacked Kapshöba for secretly making changes to the Tsondu's resolution without consulting the other drungtsi. Shakabpa tells about the famous incident when Reting demoted Künsangtse from the Tseja office and how the Shagor Khembo cried in the Tsondu regarding the need for banning soccer in Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0215_02/H_0215_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  If there were any political affairs that the Kashag couldn't decide, normally they would hand them over to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> and tell them to discuss the matters.   

**Q:**  Usually, when they discussed issues, would the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> go to the tsipön or what?   

**A:**  There were separate places for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> to have their meetings. One was in the Potala in a hall called Sasum [Tib. ས་གསུམ] and another was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> in a room on the Labrangteng [Tib. བླ་བྲང་སྟེང].   

**Q:**  Would they tell you to hold a meeting of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a>?   

**A:**  Yes they would. We wouldn't know what the meeting was for. After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> got together, they would go to the Kashag and ask them what the meeting was for. Then the Kashag would tell them the content of the meeting. Then the drungtsi would discuss the matters. They would consult with the Kashag if it was necessary to ask them their opinion. The Kashag would tell their opinion and they would decide the matters which could be decided and the decision would be submitted to the Regent. If there was something that Kashag and drungtsi couldn't decide, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> would be the place where they would wash their hands of the matter [Tib. ལག་པ་ཕིས་ས]. Then the tsondu hragdu gyepa assembly would be held and there were some people who regularly would attend this assembly meeting. And there could be an abbreviated tsondu hragdu gyepa. I think the drungtsi was considered as the abbreviated Tsondu hragdu gyepa. Otherwise, there wasn't any other abbreviated Tsondu. There was also the Tsondu gyendzom.   

**Q:**  Would the shape attend the Tsondu gyendzom?   

**A:**  No, they wouldn't. But the officials who had the position called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> denthob [Tib. སྐུ་ངོའི་གདན་ཐོབ], a rank almost equal to the kalön, would attend.   

**Q:**  Did the tsipön have the Kungö Denthob rank?   

**A:**  No. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> also didn't have that. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> were like a bridge between the Kashag and the Tsondu delivering messages back and forth. When assembly meetings were held, they would usually supervise how the discussions were going on between the Kashag and drungtsi, and the drungtsi would make the decision statement [Tib. ཙིག་ཐོ] on the matter that was agreed upon by the majority (at the meeting).   

**Q:**  Would the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> read the statement on the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, they would consult whether it would be okay to make that decision and people would give their opinions on whether they agree or disagree. After that, they would submit this statement [to the Regent]. When there were important matters, the Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> would hold meetings at night.   

**Q:**  In your time, you had to hold many meetings, right?   

**A:**  Yes. For example, like regarding the resignation of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> [Tib. གླང་མདུན] and the Reting events and the Sera disturbance at Lhundrup Dzong [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང]. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> [Tib. སེར་བྱེས] supported this matter and the monks didn't come to take their seats at the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] Prayer Festival, we had to hold a lot of meetings. When expelling the Chinese, we also had to hold meetings.   

**Q:**  When you expelled the Chinese, didn't you all, Kungö, put the Buddha statue made of turquoise on your heads and take an oath?   

**A:**  No, no, we didn't.   

**Q:**  I mean the kalön did that, right?   

**A:**  The kalön might have done that, but we didn't do that. Where was the statue of the Buddha that was made from turquoise?   

**Q:**  I heard that it was in the Kashag.   

**A:**  Probably, there wasn't one like this. I have never heard about it.   

**Q:**  You only had the statue of the Avalokitsevara, right?   

**A:**  There was a statue of the Fifth Dalai Lama and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a> and the 7th Dalai Lama Kelsang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང] and later, there was also a statue of the 13th Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was there when the turquoise Buddha statue was there.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was there. It was just after he became a kalön.   

**Q:**  I heard this was the cause of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s demotion.   

**A:**  I am not sure about this.   

**Q:**  They were thinking of doing that [expelling the Chinese], but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] took the responsibility of doing that. Is that true?   

**A:**  It was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Drunyichemmo Chömpel Thubden [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ཐུབ་བསྟན] who were the in charge of the Office Investigating Law Cases, the Deship Office. The Deship probably went through the motions of setting up spies.   

**Q:**  What was the main responsibility of the Deship Office?   

**A:**  It probably was in charge of security. So the Deship had set up spies to spy on the Guomindang Chinese. A restaurant was opened somewhere in Lhasa and probably many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were also going to that restaurant. Later, I came to know that our Khenjung [Trekhang] Samchog-la [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] had also been there. I heard that during the Mönlam when the Dalai Lama attended the Mönlam, many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> used to go to that restaurant. Actually, this was a communist restaurant. They [Deship] watched who was coming to the restaurant and came to know that Bapa Phüntso Wangyal [Tib. འབའ་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] and those people were coming. They also might have had an inner room to hold meetings and they knew that the Communist spies were gathering in there and they also had connections with the Guomindang spies. So all of them were arrested all of a sudden.   

**Q:**  I heard that at the beginning this was caused by the Deship Office. At first, the Deship reported this to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> and then the drungtsi reported it to the Kashag, right?   

**A:**  The Deship didn't report to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a>, they reported to the Kashag and the Kashag passed things down to the drungtsi. At that time, the drungtsi didn't dare to touch it so they convened the Tsondu and brought all the members of the Tsondu [to Lhasa]. The Tsondu meeting was held in Norbulinga. At the meeting it was agreed unanimously that according to the situation in China, it would be correct to expel the Chinese. By that time, the drungtsi and the Kashag had already agreed upon that. Except for a few people, all the members of the Tsondu spoke about that matter.   

**Q:**  The abbot of Drepung's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> College [Tib. འབྲས་སྤུངས་སྒོ་མང] said that he was going to send monks and was going to do such and such things. [not clear].   

**A:**  After awhile, they said that if we agree upon this, it is good and all of the members of the Tsondu should go up. Actually, they needed to show the Chinese that this was agreed to unanimously by the Tsondu. Then all of the members of the Tsondu came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  All of them might not have had horses, right?   

**A:**  Yes, all the members, regardless of having horses or not, came up to Lhasa and held the meeting in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and they decided it on that day.   

**Q:**  Did they arrest them on that day?   

**A:**  There wasn't any arrest. They didn't arrest even a single person. They just gave a notice to the Chinese representatives that they must leave within a week. They sent the notices and some of the Chinese were handed over to be under the supervision of their landlords or their inn-keepers "like attaching the needles to the collar" [Tib. gnas tshang kgab gong gzer].   

**Q:**  Even the Chinese representative was sent back, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This was in 1948-49, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On that day, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> were at the front followed by the members of the Tsondu riding their horses. They came to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and all the people were watching and wondering and were apprehensive saying what are they going to do.   

**Q:**  Probably, the turquoise Buddha statue might be in the Deship Office which they used for taking the oath.   

**A:**  Probably not. I don't have any idea about the Kashag and Seshib taking an oath.   

**Q:**  I heard that this was the reason for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> getting demoted, because probably he had said (leaked) something about it.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was treated severely by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> but I don't know why. And Reting also treated <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> severely [Tib. ནན་པོ]. Many things happened among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and Künsangtse was also demoted from his post as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> head.   

**Q:**  Why was he demoted?   

**A:**  There was a lot of talk regarding this matter. Probably when he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> head of Nagchu [Tib. nag qu 'go pa], he treated Reting's traders aggressively when they were doing trading. Then when he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> head, when Reting Labrang sent some people to get something, he said something sassy. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> was demoted because he said the proverb, "Not being full even after eating the mountain and not being quenched even after drinking the ocean." [Tib., རི་བོ་ཟོས་ནས་མ་འགྲངས། རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཏུངས་ནས་མ་ངོམས།]. He definitely said that. I was there.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Töpa [Tib. སྟོད་པ] Khembo altered (the meaning of) [Tib. སྒྱུར] this talk. What was the name of this Khembo?   

**A:**  He was called Gomdzö Chöndze [Tib. གོ་མཛོད་ཆོས་མཛད]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] was the senior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>, the gadrung chemmo [Tib. བཀའ་དྲུང་ཆེན་མོ].   

**Q:**  Usually, would the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> chemmo attend the Tsondu?   

**A:**  Yes, he would. He was one of the representatives of the Tsondu. I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་པ] 1. A secretary in the Tsikhang Office in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. An accountant.">tsipa</a> of the Tsikhang [Tib. རྩིས་པ] then. Actually, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>'s title was higher, but he used to sit with the Fifth Rank officials, the Letsenpa [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] and wore a purple color brocade chupa. It was strange. He was sitting near to me and near to that there was the bearded Kamekang Gyaula [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང་རྒྱའུ་ལགས]. The abbots and Lukhangwa argued with each other a lot.   

**Q:**  How did they confront each other?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, "It isn't okay to offer government estates to Reting. We are grateful to Reting so we should pull out the hair from our own noses [Tib. སྣ་ཁུང་ནང་གི་སྤུ་འཐོག] [which means we should offer estates from the kudrak]. Otherwise, it would become like the proverb, "the Lama's robe will become finished when people take little pieces of it as a blessing [Tib. བླ་མའི་ན་བཟའ་འཐོག་འཐོག་གིས་ཟད] [the government's estates would be finished if we give little by little to Reting, etc]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> also said the proverb about the ocean. Kamekang was very critical that this was aimed at Reting and was a great offense to Reting. At that meeting, the Drunyichemmo Ta Lama [Tib. ཏ་བླ་མ] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] and Chömpel Thubden were there. Then there were the Tsipön, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, Shelkarlingpa [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིང་པ] and Driyü [Tib. འབྲི་ཡུལ]. Since there were serious arguments, it took a long time to conclude the meeting. It was said that we should decide the matter that very night for otherwise the (content of the) talks would become known widely. Finally they decided to offer [Reting] 4-5 estates like Bodong Tashigang [Tib. བོ་དོང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒང], Gyantse Lungmar [Tib. རྒྱལ་རྩེ་ལུང་དམར]. Then they told the members not to go away and Kapshöba made the draft on a Samdra writing board. Lukhangwa told Kapshöba to hold on, and made some suggestions, and then he stopped for awhile and made some more suggestions. He was acting like a deity giving prophecies through a medium/oracle. Like this, they made a very good draft statement [Tib. ཚིག་ཟིན]. Then the members told them to read it again and all of them agreed to it saying it was well done. Then Ngawang Thöndrub, Angula [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ, ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] and I were told to come in early the next morning to copy the statement. They also said that all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> will come and they told the members of Tsondu to come at a fixed time, like 11-12 a.m.   

**Q:**  Did they hold the meeting in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?   

**A:**  No, it was held in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>'s Labrangteng. Then the meeting was over and the two of us went there at around 8-9 a.m. At that time, nobody was there. Although I was the one in charge of keeping the documents, I was not allowed to break the seal of the document box unless one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> was present. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> came and broke the seal on the box and took out the draft statement. Then one of us prepared the paper [on which the decision was to be written]. Before we copied the statement, Kapshöba read the draft and made some changes. So the two of us were saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> would argue with doing that and we were wondering what kind of changes Kapshöba made because we didn't know. Then we were told to copy it, but we acted slightly reluctant for awhile. We just started copying the heading of the draft, hoping that the kung [rest of the officials] would come. Then the drungtsi and some of the representatives like the abbots also arrived. After that, tea was served and we ate bag. Drunyichemmo Chömpel Thubden handed the draft of the statement written on the samdra to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> while eating his bag. Then Dombor recognized Kapshöba's handwriting and he screamed while kneading his bag and used the term for scolding people, "Key Kapshöba! Behave yourself! Otherwise we might have to cut off your hands!" Oh! My. Three jewels! Then Kapshöba said, "What happened?" Dombor said, "Who wrote this?" Kapshöba said, "I wrote it." Then Dombor said, "We didn't discuss this last night. Go call Lukhangwa and ask whether we had wording like this or not." Lukhangwa was in the Kashag office. As far as Dombor was concerned, he didn't regard the members of the assembly as humans. Oh! My. Three Jewels! Kapshöba was kind of funny and said, "I am sorry! I made this correction. I will just rub it off." and he rubbed it off. When Lukhangwa came, things had already calmed down and the statement drafted last night was confirmed. When Dombor read the draft, he was trembling [with anger]. Right at that time, Angula told me [joking], "He is going to go into trance." Right after that he screamed out as I mentioned above, holding his hand with bag on it. As far as I am concerned, I can't remember what kind of the corrections were made, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> remembered what was in the draft and what changes were made.   

**Q:**  You, kung, tried to delay copying the draft because of the correction, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We were afraid thinking something [bad] would happen. The other tsipön like Driyü and Shelkarlingpa didn't say anything, although all of them read the draft. Chömpel Thubden waited for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> to come and then when he came in he didn't say anything. They were all smart. It was Dombor who said things openly. That was the time when the song came out with the words, "The bear [Dombor] had pimples on his face and the Naga [Lukhangwa] got offended. The garuda's claws had something happen [cut off] [Tib. དོམ་ལ་ཐོར་པ་སྐེས་ནས་ཀླུ་ལ་གནོད་པ་བཏང། ཁྱུང་གི་སྡེར་མོ] [the wording is incomplete]   

**Q:**  Yes, there was such a song with that wording, "The Naga was offended and the bear got pimples on his face and something happened to the garuda's claws [Tib. ཀླུ་ལ་གནོད་པ་འཁྱོལ་བས་དོམ་ལ་ཐོར་པ་དོན་སོང]. Soon after that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆེ] A high monk official of the third rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">khenche</a> [Tib. མཁན་ཆེ] [a powerless position] and couldn't do anything.   

**A:**  Just after that, I had to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and when we were chit-chatting while having bag together with fried beef and pickles. I told him, "If you speak very strongly at the meeting, it might cause you trouble." By that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s eyeballs had already been gouged out. He said, "Even if my eyeballs would be gouged out and I would have to beg for food under the Yuthok Bridge, if people would then ask who I am, when they know that I am Lukhangwa, they would give me 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>, instead of giving me the 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> [Tib. སྐར་མ] that they are supposed to give. And they would say that his eyeballs were gouged out because he worked for the government." He was so courageous.   

**Q:**  He must have had great enthusiasm.   

**A:**  This was something that I had seen and heard and was involved in, though I did not have any power.   

**Q:**  This meeting was for offering estates to Reting to express gratitude for confirming the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, it was the Töpa Khembo [Tib. སྟོད་པ་མཁན་པོ] who was the person who raised the talk [about Khyungram], right? Before that, was he almost appointed as the abbot of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> [Tib. བྱེས་པ] or Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] colleges in Sera. He had a lot of trouble when the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> [Tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] didn't accept him, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a lot of talk about him. I don't have any idea about this. Later he also became an ex-abbot and there was another abbot.   

**Q:**  This might be after Reting became the ex-Regent?   

**A:**  Probably, it was before the Reting became the ex-Regent.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for that?   

**A:**  Probably Reting did that to warn him to be careful because he did something too extreme [Tib. ཐལ་ཆེ་བ] and this abbot always didn't get along well with Lukhangwa. He was called Jungnela [Tib. འབྱུང་གནས་ལགས] and had a white complexion.   

**Q:**  I remember he was tall and thin.   

**A:**  When he would talk, he would frequently use the word "candidly/frankly", Ngö ngö Jenjen [Tib. དངོས་དངོས་རྗེན་རྗེན]. So we nicknamed him "Ngöngö Jenjen."   

**Q:**  That was not Jungnela. Jungnela was very eloquent.   

**A:**  There was another abbot called Shagor Khembo [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར་མཁན་པོ] who looked like a nun. He cried at the meeting.   

**Q:**  Why did he cry?   

**A:**  He cried, saying that people were playing soccer.   

**Q:**  Was he the person who cried?   

**A:**  Yes. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Why the hell was he doing these reckless things? [Tib. མི་བྱེད་རྒུ་བྱེད་ཚ་ལ] Actually, he didn't have any knowledge of the scriptures.   

**A:**  He was like a nun.   

**Q:**  The Lama called Shagor Khentrul [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར་མཁན་སྤྲུལ] who is now in Switzerland was a pupil of Shagor Khembo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> (monk's household). After the former abbot was the abbot for 18 years, he became the abbot. But he didn't have any knowledge of the scriptures. Basically, many of the abbots put pressure [on him] regarding the matter of playing soccer, but Shagor Khembo was the one who cried and said, "At this time when Buddhism is declining, people are kicking the Buddha's head."   

**Q:**  It was a ball not the Buddha's head.   

**A:**  I wonder who said what to give him this kind of impression.   

**Q:**  Did he cry loudly?   

**A:**  Yes, he did. So soccer was banned in an urgent manner. It was at the same time when they closed the schools. They had this talk in one day.   

**Q:**  I still don't know how they stopped the schools and why the Tsondu stopped it.   

