# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0215.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 W. D. Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] was a very prominent aristocratic government official who held the rank of Tsipön. He is the author of "Tibet: A Political History." In this interview, he continues talking in detail about the Panchen Lama's plan to return to Tibet and how he died in Jyekundo. The subject also talks about the sudden arrival of the Khazaks in Lhasa and about the Chinese Communist's Long March through Tibetan areas and how the Tibetan Government sent Panda Tobgye to talk with the Chinese. He also talks about the arrival in Tibet of the German expedition led by Schaefer. The subject then explains in detail how the Tibetan Government announced the candidates for the selection of the reincarnation of the 13th Dalai Lama and how the Auspicious Tsondu was held to announce the confirmation of the candidate born in Amdo as the real reincarnation.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0215_06/H_0215_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  The Panchen Lama formally accepted to return and had given a separate letter stating this.   

**Q:**  To whom did he give this letter?   

**A:**  He had addressed this letter to the Regent, the Prime Minister and the kalön [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་བཀའ་ཤག]. In the letter he mentioned that he would return along with a Bodyguard Regiment of Chinese and requested the government to grant them necessary travel documents and also to issue a general order to all the areas on the route to receive them. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> also sent a letter which mentioned that 500 Chinese soldiers with 20 officers had left form Xining with the Panchen Lama. Then they received another letter which stated that a Chinese man named Wang something and a fellow from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> had left from Darstedo with a large number of retinue. This sent the government officials into a furor and a hurried meeting was held. In the meeting most of the kalön voiced their disbelief. However, they sent a special envoy to receive the Panchen Lama in a hurried manner. Doring [Tib. རྡོ་རིང] was one of the envoys. They went to Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ] and met the procession there. They saw the Chinese soldiers-escorts too. The envoys talked through the Joint Governor of Kham, the Doji Drelpo [Tib. མདོ་སྤྱི་སྦྲེལ་པོ] that the Panchen Lama cannot return with his so-called Chinese escorts. At that time, the Doji Dzasa was Surkhang Surpa. So they had a lot of talk on this. Meanwhile a lot of meetings were held in Lhasa and everyone agreed that no Chinese should be allowed to accompany the Panchen Lama. He should be only allowed to come up with his regular Tibetan attendants. Instructions were dispatched to Chamdo stating that no Chinese or Mongolians should be allowed to come on the pretext of being his attendants. All these instructions were passed on and discussed between the Panchen Lama and the Doji. Further instructions were sent to all the border guards asking them to stop any such parties including Chinese and Mongolians. Since the Panchen Lama had such a large party and a lot of wealth to bring up, probably numerous people went down from Tashilhunpo to receive him bringing large amounts of fodder and other necessities. This created a lot of speculation and rumors [Tib. སྦིར་སྒྲ]. Secondly, a large number of traders like Noyön [Tib. ནོར་ཡོན] of Tashilhunpo had come to Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ], Markham and Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] to collect grain, fodder and butter. This again created wild speculation and the large caravan from Tashilhunpo added further confusion to the whole situation Neither side knew exactly what was really going on like the proverb, "The enemy couldn't guess about one's enemy." [Tib. དགྲ་ཚོད་དགྲས་མ་ལོན་པ]. At that time again there was some talk about Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] Lama going to Chamdo to appeal to the Doji.   

**Q:**  I think he did more than persuading the Doji. He had also written personally to Reting Regent.   

**A:**  Whatever the case may be, he [Phabongkha] definitely went to Jyekundo.   

**Q:**  Phabongkha Lama went down personally to appeal to the border security force to permit the Chinese escorts to enter the country and told them that the Chinese escorts were harmless and they would be no threat to the government.   

**A:**  There was nothing about this in the Tsondu documents.   

**Q:**  That would not be entered in the record book since it was a private letter written by Phabongkha.   

**A:**  All the correspondence between the Doji and the Panchen's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> and about the talks with the Panchen Lama's Dzasa in Chamdo were received by the assembly. Now the matter was still not settled well and it became a very big dispute [Tib. ཡ་འགལ་ཆེན་པོ], so they convened a Large General Assembly, a Tsondu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chemmo</a> [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་ཆེན་མོ].   

**Q:**  What happened in the Large General Assembly? Weren't you the Tsipön at that time?   

**A:**  No, I was not. I was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་པ] 1. A secretary in the Tsikhang Office in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. An accountant.">tsipa</a> and actually I was in charge of keeping the documents of the Tsondu [Tib. ཡིག་ཚགས].   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was yet to come into power, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I think most probably, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was the Acting Tsipön or the Senior Gadrung. We were together in the meeting. The meeting was held at the New Assembly Hall [Tib. ཚོམ་ཆེན་གསར་པ] whereas usually the ceremony was held in the Potala. There was numerous talking about the Panchen Lama and it was exciting. In addition to that, he had sent a written notice known as a dayik. It was brought down by the drungtsi. The letter was written on a yellow brocade with round dragon designs (Tib. dzögö [མཛོད་གོས]). The heading of the letter was as follows, "This notice is from the office of the Panchen's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> at Jyekundo and all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates and subjects located on the routes within the Great <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Monastery via Lhasa should keep in their mind the following content: [Tib. སྐྱེ་མདོ་ནང་མ་གང་ནས། གདན་ས་ཆེན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷུན་པོ་ཕྱིན་གྱི་ལྷ་ས་བརྒྱུད་ལམ་འཁེལ་རྫོང་གཞིས་རྒྱལ་དམངས་རྣམས་ནས་ངེས་དགོས]. As soon as the Assembly heard the way the letter was addressed, the meeting erupted into a roar of indignant protest [Tib. འབར]. In the letter, Lhasa was not mentioned rightfully as the capital of a nation, but like a mere name of site on the route. On top of that, the letter dictated that the Panchen Lama was returning along with his large number of attendants and necessary accommodations, thrones and fodder for such and such amount of horses should be prepared. Further, they had the audacity to mention about 500 Chinese soldiers would be coming with him. I don't remember and I didn't see it in the letter, but Lukhangwa said that in the letter it was written, "In order to make sure to be able to suppress the Tibetan demons [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་པོ་མགོ་གནོན་ཐུབ་ཐབས], we have sent 20 officers and some 500 Chinese soldiers so you have to make all the arrangements to make their stay comfortable. This, as already mentioned, sent the Tsondu into a furor. No further discussion was possible in the Tsondu. Even the representatives of Sera and Drepung were having a heated debate among themselves.   

**Q:**  How was it? What did they say?   

**A:**  I think it was one of the Drepung representatives who said that we must do something because the Panchen Lama must be invited back and unless some consideration is shown, he will not be able to return. Another faction opposed this idea. There were a lot of arguments amongst the abbots. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was also very aggressive and he was the most forceful protestor, shouting loudly at the meeting and stretching out his neck. He said, "Our beloved Dalai Lama is yet to be and we, his followers and subjects, cannot make decisions, just as a servant cannot change any decision already made by the master [Tib. དཔོན་ཐག་གཡོག་གཅོད]. Initially, they had the plan to take over Shigatse Dzong and the various offices opened by the government at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> would be closed. All these decisions had been made by the 13th Dalai Lama and we the subjects cannot change them. His reincarnation is yet to be recognized and he has not appointed anyone to function as the religious and temporal ruler. Under such circumstances, we cannot change the standing orders. Lukhangwa gave a highly emotional and fiery speech. Everyone, from the top official to the minor ordinary lay officials and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> also stood up and expressed their unanimous decision to deny entry to the Panchen Lama if even a single Chinese was to accompany him. They said that they were willing to take an oath which says that the Tibetan people unanimously agree and make an oath [Tib. མནའ་གན་མཐུ་མོ་ཆེ] to deny entry to the Panchen Lama if even a single Chinese accompanies him. The session lasted till noon. They left to report their decision to the Kashag. However, after a while everyone cooled down, after much discussion they said it is not proper to bar the Panchen Lama from entering Tibet and some consideration must be shown. Finally, it was decided that he will be allowed to bring his Chinese escorts up to Tashilhunpo and they can stay there for a month. But there should be a foreign country who will vouch [Tib. བར་ཞུགས] that the Panchen Lama's Chinese escorts would leave after a month's stay.   

**Q:**  Where would they find a foreign country?   

**A:**  If no neutral foreign country vouches then they will not allow even a single Chinese to enter the country. If the Panchen Lama wishes to come to Tibet along with his attendants [excluding the Chinese] the Tibetan government will make all the arrangements including for his bodyguards. However, we will not tolerate any Chinese or Mongolians to enter the country since we have already taken an oath not to allow any Chinese or Mongolians. The decision was formally put under seal [signed] the next day. The Drunyichemmo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> was there. His handwriting was very good and the Tsipön Shelkar Lingpa and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] The name of the aristocratic family of an important government official.">Trogawa</a> [Tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བོ] were there. It took the whole day to seal the oath.   

**Q:**  Was it like they couldn't control the people and they made the oath or was there a plan for doing that from the beginning?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea about that.   

**Q:**  According to the contents of the letter written by the Regent to Phabongkha, he mentioned that the Tsondu had already passed the above decision and there was nothing he could do about it.   

**A:**  He had written something like that.   

**Q:**  Actually, 500 Chinese soldiers was not a large amount, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but even though it was a small number of people, it would defile the place [Tib. ས་འཛད]. In the past, when Huang Musung came, he left some people behind him. So I am not sure whether they were afraid of this.   

**Q:**  Is it true that they could not continue this dialogue of compromise for long since the Panchen Lama died shortly after?   

**A:**  That is true. The official letter denying entry to the Chinese soldiers was dispatched. When this letter arrived at Jyekundo, the Panchen Lama had already left for a visit to the Monastery of Ragshi Lungshug [Tib.?] which probably was quite near to Jagsamkha [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཁ]. However, he heard this news. Before that, he had received a message from Beijing saying that for the time being he should not proceed to Lhasa and he must send back the Chinese soldiers. Then he returned to Jyekundo and died there. Some people said that he died in Ragshi Lungshug Monastery. Much later, I made inquiries from the monastic official of Thondrub Ling [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་གླིང] Monastery in Jyekundo. They told me that the Panchen Lama died at a place called Gyanak Labrang [Tib. རྒྱ་ནག་བླ་བྲང], which was an estate that belonged to the same monastery in Jyekundo. I think they had some problems concerning the remains of the late Panchen Lama. Some said that the remains should be taken up to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> area [where his monastery was] and the other said, it should be taken down to Xining. A third faction wanted to take them to somewhere in Dartsedo. Finally, it was taken down to Triu Khangsar [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁང་གསར] by the Wang something Lama. Some say this came about because one of the attendants of the late Panchen Lama got together with the Khangsar Lady Chieftain, Khangsar Pönmo [Tib. ཁང་གསར་དཔོན་མོ] and they got married. I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] was the Doji and he wrote to the government saying that there is disagreement among the followers concerning the remains of the late Panchen Lama and it is a good opportunity if the government sent the Acting Depön Chokpe [Tib. ལྕོག་སྤེ] to bring back the remains. He was a bearded boy. Meanwhile, down there, Khangsar Pönmo and the Chinese Liu Zijian didn't get along well about the bridegroom and they sent some Chinese soldiers. After that, the remains of the Panchen Lama was taken up via Jyekundo and then to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>. The government offered 500 butter lamps and other necessary religious rites everyday wherever they stayed over night till the remains were taken to Tashilhunpo, the root monastery. This was supplied by the office in charge of performing rituals [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ཁང]. A kalön accompanied the remains up to Tashilhunpo.   

**Q:**  Did the remains go through Lhasa?   

**A:**  No. Not through Lhasa, but it was taken through the Northern route.   

**Q:**  They took the remains up and down so many times, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they took it down and then they loaded the remains on horseback and brought it up to Jyekundo like running away.   

**Q:**  During that time, they just kept the remains, right?   

**A:**  Yes, then the government sent a palanquin and brought it up. When it reached the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> monastery, an official ceremony was held. At that time, the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama was yet to be recognized.   

**Q:**  At that time, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> discharged from his post?   

**A:**  Yes, he had already been discharged, but he didn't die.   

**Q:**  This was during 1935-36?   

**A:**  Yes. I remember the newly discovered Dalai Lama came up to Lhasa in 1938, right?   

**Q:**  No. It was in 1939. After that, did not the so-called Communist Long March [Tib. གུང་ཕྲན་རྒྱང་སྐྱོད] take place?   

**A:**  Yes. The Long March took place around that time, but I don't know much about it. There was not much furor about this in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I heard that Kyabje [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ] Phabongkha performed the fire exorcism rite [Tib. སྦྱིན་སྲེག] down there, right?   

**A:**  Most of the action took place in the Chamdo area. A few of the regiments were sent from Lhasa. Most of this 'Long March' took place in Ba, Litang and Geda [Tib.?].   

**Q:**  At that time both the Regent and the Prime Minister were in office, right?   

**A:**  I am not certain. Most probably, they would have been in office.   

**Q:**  This was when many Kazakhs [Tib. ཧ་ས་ཁ་པ] rushed into Tibet, right?   

**A:**  It was long after that that a few Kazakhs went from the north to the Afghanistan side. Only a few of them came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  During the Communists Long March they arrived in the Horkhok area. At that time, the Doji were Lobsang Palden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན] and Surkhang Surpa. The government had sent strong orders to them saying to stop them from crossing over the Tibetan border.   

**A:**  Yes. Many orders were sent. That time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye and the elder brother of Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. bya rgod rnam rgayl rdo rje] had gone to talk to the Communist Chinese and ask them not to cross the Tibetan border. However, they were arrested and were thrown into jail by the Communists.   

**Q:**  Actually, they [Communists] themselves were running away, right?   

**A:**  No. The communists were coming up. So they went to tell them not to come up to the border. To get them [Jagö, etc] released they took a few hundred thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain and thousands of cattle from Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ]. The ironic thing is that after they were released after paying a fortune in ransom, the Chinese conferred Jagötsang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye a rank and promised to grant them a lot of favors when the Communists came into power. After that, the Chinese soldiers went back to Xining where they did not stop for long. I think they stayed there only for a year. I heard that they also made war in Xining and many of them were killed. The Chinese on their Long March were really in pathetic condition.   

**Q:**  After running out of food supplies, they had to even boil their shoe soles and eat them, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where did they make war in Xining?   

**A:**  Ma Bufang's brother who was called the Commander Gar was supposed to have massacred thousands of people.   

**Q:**  He just killed them, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He killed several thousand and also buried them alive. This talk had reached Lhasa. Fortunately these killings did not take place in Tibet. At that time, the government performed rituals, but I didn't know in detail.   

**Q:**  At that time, people were afraid of the Communists, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And a few rituals were performed.   

**Q:**  According to my notes here, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> resigned from his post in 1937. Is this correct?   

**A:**  It must be somewhere around that time. Within 2 years after his trip to Chöngorye, he had resigned.   

**Q:**  He went to Chöngorye in 1935 (Wood-Pig Year) and in 1936 (Fire-Dog Year) the Communists Long March took place.   

**A:**  I am definite that within a year or two after his trip, he resigned. However, I don't remember the day and date precisely. Actually, I have a note in which all the dates are written but unfortunately it is not here with me.   

**Q:**  Did you write the dates in your book?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  At that time, the German Doctor Schaefer arrived with five people, right?   

**A:**  I think it was around that time, they arrived for sure.   

**Q:**  Why did they come?   

**A:**  It was during Reting's time. I was also there in the meeting. According to what they said outwardly, they had sent a petition from Gangtok asking to visit Tibet. However, I don't know what their real reasons were. I am not sure what the British reported internally. Richardson was also in Lhasa. Later, the Tsondu granted them permission to enter Tibet. At that time, Hitler was yet to hit the scene. He was yet to become famous or infamous. No one knew who Hitler was. The German doctor and his friends had stated that they only wanted to look at the mountains and the lakes [tourist] so they arrived one fine day and stayed at Trede Linga [Tib. འཕྲལ་བདེ་གླིང་ག]. They were all bearded people. I used to think that all the Germans were bearded people. Probably, the foreigners used to keep their beard long to show that they had been on a trip. They had been warned that they are not allowed to bring in any wireless equipment except cameras. Later, they made a facility to listen to wireless, but I don't know if they were allowed to send messages. They had one person among them who knew how to operate a wireless set. They did not distrust the Tibetans. They seemed to trust us and they were not afraid of the Tibetans. They pitched a tent on the roof of the Trede Linga's recreation [Tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང] house. There was a bald person with blue eyes who lived in the tent and we were brought there to look after him. They had a Sikkimese interpreter sent by the Indian Government and we told them that you are not allowed to use a wireless. They said, "Since there were no newspapers and they are forbidden to bring a wireless set, they said that they fell completely out of touch with the outside world, so they had improvised a crude radio or wireless receiver. In an empty Vaseline box into which they had put some batteries and then they required a blue substance known as Nele Thödra [Tib. ནེ་ལེ་ཐོད་ཁྲག྄]. By putting the doctor's stethoscope to this contraption you could hear the news. He would ask us to listen to it too. We didn't know if they could send messages through this apparatus. The British had put them under surveillance, constantly looking at which <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> they were meeting with and whatever they were doing. They came during a New Year ceremony and later at the Mönlam Festival, he [the bald German] got stoned by the monks.   

**Q:**  Why did they stone him?   

**A:**  It is said that he did not pay attention to them [Tib. མཐོང་སྣང་ལ་མ་འཇུག་པ]. However, most probably he must have tried to photograph the exorcism rite [Tib. ཏོརྒྱ]. The Indians had provided them with a Sikkimese interpreter, grooms and cooks. We provided them with a house only.   

**Q:**  I heard that the British stoned him and then they took away their cameras.   

**A:**  They couldn't do that because there were many people. They had brought from there people who were Sikkimese who spoke Tibetan and they were also serving them and they even brought grooms.   

**Q:**  What was the main purpose of their visit to Tibet?   

**A:**  After arriving in Tibet, they said that they wanted to visit the Yambu Lagang [Tib. ཡམ་བུ་བླ་སྒང] [the first house built in Tibet].   

**Q:**  Who was the liaison officer (Tib. ནེཤེན [སྣེ་ཤན])?   

**A:**  Möndröl Khyenrab Künsang [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོལ་མཁྱེན་རབ་ཀུན་བཟང] was the liaison officer. He spoke excellent English and was kind of engrossed in English [language]. Once I remember at the time of the festival where guns and arrows were shot from horseback behind the Potala [Tib. རྫོང་རྒྱབ་ཞར་འཕེན], tents were pitched for the Kashag and the tents for the lay officials were pitched in a line. During this festival, Richardson, a Chinese representative left behind by Huang Musung, a Nepalese representative (who spoke good English), and the Germans and some Bhutanese (who did not take active interest) were all invited. Most of them were standing and talking among themselves. We were at the party but we were more like spectators. We wondered what languages they were using among themselves. Later we realized that English was the common medium and this language was very good. Later the Germans visited Sera and Drepung, but I am not sure if they went to Ganden. After that, they sought permission to visit Yambu Lagang. They said they were very curious to know about the swastikas. Their yarn was that the German swastika had originated from the Bön religion. The swastika had been sent from this Yambu Lagang through the river which came to Germany and now the Germans have made it their own. I don't know if the story has any truth to it, but that is what the Germans told us. So they went to Yambu Lagang and it seems they killed some birds at night by shining a kind of light and immediately we received a report saying that the Germans were hunting animals. At that time, he came to my room. Before that we had no contact whatsoever. I knew the Phala family well and once when his mother was ill with edema, Möndröl brought this German Doctor. I was with them. I photographed them. I had a beautiful camera. They told me that my camera was very good and it was a product of Germany. Later, when they were returning, they had left behind a number of unexposed reels for me with Möndröl and photographic paper and other things used for photography through Möndröl along with a letter. Möndröl died shortly after that. I did not get these gifts. Later, I was told they were displayed in the Wongtö Shinga market [Tib. འོང་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག] and it was bought by the Nepalese photographer. His family members would not have known what it was nor would they have known that it was a gift for me.   

**Q:**  I wonder if they went to Yambu Lagang to investigate about the Swastika and whether this was their only purpose?   

**A:**  Probably, they [government] didn't investigate and I didn't know anything about their purpose. Later, we heard from the German side that they were sent by Hitler who thought that in Tibet there was a meditation known as Tumo [Tib. གཏུམ་མོ] which makes the subject invincible against the cold.   

**Q:**  I also heard about this.   

**A:**  So he had sent them to investigate and study this. I knew about it much later. Unless Möndröl might have reported to the Kashag about this, in the Tsondu there was no hint about it. I doubt if the Tumo can be taught just like that. You must be in a lot of meditation retreats and must have a good Guru to guide you.   

**Q:**  You can learn from a teacher even if you were not in meditation retreat, but they won't teach you Tumo because it would be used in the wrong way.   

**A:**  That is one version of this. There is another version we heard from the Chinese side. According to them, the Germans were supposed to be hunters. Previously, they were supposed to have come to the border areas of Xining and Russia in the place called Govidi. Probably, that was in the report sent by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> after they left. It was said that they came below Jyekundo and had shot bears and brown bears and they were supposed to have photographed yaks and studied about their habits and behavior. In other words, he was supposed to be an animal psychologist. He was supposed to have been sent not by Hitler, but by Himmler. It was written about this in the report from the Tibetan office in Beijing (Khendrönlosum). Their report arrived only after the Germans had departed.   

**Q:**  For what reasons were they sent to Tibet?   

**A:**  They were sent to study the mountains and lakes of Tibet. There was Dr. Schaefer and there was another doctor. One of them was called Chandzöla and the wireless operator and 2 other people. There were five of them.   

**Q:**  If they were not allowed to bring a wireless operator, doesn't it also mean that they couldn't make use of the radio too.   

**A:**  They were instructed not to bring a wireless set but there was no restriction concerning a radio. However, they did not bring a radio. They made one and invited us to listen to it. All their interpreters were Sikkimese.   

**Q:**  Was World War II being waged at the time?   

**A:**  The Second World War had yet to start. The war started only after they went back.   

**Q:**  While they stayed in Lhasa, who was their closest friend?   

**A:**  There was no talk about anyone being their closest friend. Now, if a British comes to Lhasa, the first person they would look up was Tsarong.   

**Q:**  They were Germans?   

**A:**  Yes, they were Germans, but our people would treat any white man as a 'Yinji' [Tib. དབྱིན་ཇི] Englishman. Any Englishman coming to Lhasa will definitely go to Tsarong. After him they would go to Taring. Taring was the Laja. Once Taring was talking with Doctor Schaefer in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and at that time Taring was in charge of the alms. They would go to Phala's house very often. His mom was ill and Möndröl would bring the doctor to examine her. Phala threw a party. I was also invited. At that time, we had never seen a Western dance. Möndröl danced away with his monk's robe on. During Reting's Regency, Phala was the shöndrön. After visiting Sera, Drepung and Yambu Lagang, they visited Samye and crossed the Gepa ferry site and went to Tranduk [Tib. ཁྲ་འབྲུག] too.   

**Q:**  Did they go to Tsari?   

**A:**  No, they were not permitted to go there.   

**Q:**  Later, our government accepted them as what?   

**A:**  I wonder? There was not much talk about them. Not much interest was taken about them.   

**Q:**  The government was not that attentive, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they received the report that the Germans were hunters, what comments did they give?   

**A:**  We would not give much attention to such matters. Only if they did something wrong which might effect the government, then we concerned ourselves. When they were stoned by the monks, we were quite concerned about them.   

**Q:**  Actually according to belief, we say that if any foreigner comes and visits our temples and monasteries, their mere presence would defile the Sanctity [Tib. གྲིབ་ཕོག] of these holy places, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was a common belief. The Germans visited the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and one took photographs, but he could not get a shot of the Buddha's Image [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] because the iron gate like shutters [Tib. ལྕགས་དྲ] were pulled down. This had been ordered by the Kashag. So they took the photo along with the iron shutters.   

**Q:**  What was the reason?   

**A:**  I don't know. Anyway, the shutters had been pulled down. At that time, since we were at the Tsikhang we went to satisfy our curiosity. We wondered how they could take photos in the dark room and saw that they were using flashes with a sound "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོག] 1. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone. 2. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together.">tshog</a>"] and a smoke would rise. They did not stay long in Lhasa - only about 2 months.   

**Q:**  Do you know anything about Chairman Liu of Xikang [Ch. xi khang liu zhu xi]?   

**A:**  No, I have no information about him.   

**Q:**  It was about Panchen Lama's attendant and so on.   

**A:**  Yes it was about a Khangsar Lady Chieftain [Tib. ཁང་གསར་དཔོན་མོ] getting married to one of the attendants and so on. I have not much information about them.   

**Q:**  Was Triu Khangsar [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁང་གསར] the name of a place?   

**A:**  Yes, it was in the Triu area where there were a few chieftains like Darakhang [Tib. ད་ར་ཁང], Khangsar, Jakla [Tib. ལྕག་ལ], and so on.   

**Q:**  After that, it was around the time when they were going to select the possible candidates for the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama, right? <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> had resigned in 1938 (Earth-Tiger Year). We have talked about this.   

**A:**  I was in the Tsondu when they went to report to the Regent. When the Chinese were advancing into Chamdo, a meeting was held, but I cannot recollect much about the proceedings. In the Tsondu, they told us that a member of the Jagö [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད] family and another person called [Panda] Abo Tobgye were arrested by the Communist Chinese. Since Surkhang Sey [Tib. སྲས] who later became the kalön, had most of the information about this incident, he was invited to the Tsondu. At that time, he was yet to be appointed as shape. The Doji was Dzasa Sursur [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར]. I was sent there to meet him. He told us the details about the 2 people arrested by the Communist soldiers. There are certain reasons. I did not think about it then. We were poorly informed although we were supposed to be very much involved in the political affairs of our country. It shows how little we knew about the political set up of our country. Especially about our Kashag, about the Drunyichemmo and Tsipön and the various high ranking leaders and other powerful and influential people of our country. So we had to ask Surkhang who Jagö was? He told us that he was one of the ministers (Tib. dünkhor [མདུན་འཁོར]) of the Derge King [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་རྒྱལ་པོ]. He told us that he belonged to one of the better families of Kham and many other details.   

**Q:**  Didn't you know which Jagö he was?   

**A:**  We didn't know which member he was.   

**Q:**  Isn't that foolish? I mean he was one of our countrymen and not a foreigner?   

**A:**  That is what I have said. Among the government officials, there must have been many who didn't know how many government estates there were, and which area they were located in? They were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> of the government. These were our shortcomings.   

**Q:**  Around that time, were the names of possible candidates like the son of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> Trichen (Tib. Mindröling Dungsey [སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང་གདུང་སྲས]) collected for the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  The collection of candidates took place before Ketsang [Tib. ཀེའུ་ཚང] [Rimpoche] returned to Lhasa [from Qinghai]. The Minling Dungsey then, or now the Minling Trichen [Tib. ཁྲི་ཆེན], who is at present residing somewhere in Rajpur, and another person of prominence (I can't recollect his name) were in town. Thönpa [Tib. ཐོན་པ] and I received orders from above saying that the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama has appeared, so the incarnate lamas have to come to the capital to investigate. So you should go to receive one of the candidates, who happens to be the Minling Dungsey. We were told to collect the necessary anticipated expenses and go to receive him. His accommodation was arranged at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང] 1.The name of the incarnate lama who had served as regent. 2. The monastery of that lama in Lhasa.">Tsecholing</a>. I think it was just a publicity stunt to draw attention away from the real Dalai Lama who had already been recognized. Thönpa was one of the tsendrön and I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་པ] 1. A secretary in the Tsikhang Office in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. An accountant.">tsipa</a> in the Tsikhang. So we inquired about when we should leave. They said they will let us know shortly and we have to prepare the accommodations in Trip [Tib. གྲིབ] Tsecholing Monastery. So we thought that the order to proceed would come very soon and got ready to leave since we were gong to receive one of the possible candidates for the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. We had to make arrangements quite elaborately. Since Thönpa also belonged to a very high family, we made preparations to go in style. We went to check the accommodations at Tsecholing. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of the Tsecholing told us that he could stay in the Labrang. At that time, the Lama of Tsecholing was related to the Panchen Lama who was down there.   

**Q:**  Where do you mean down there?   

**A:**  Probably he was in Kumbum [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ]. So they said the Lama is not here, so he can also stay in the summer [Tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང] house in the orchard. Wherever we wished, he was willing to accommodate us. Later, we never had to invite him. It was just publicity to make a smoke screen for the real process of installing the Dalai Lama who had already been found and confirmed.   

**Q:**  You didn't need to invite this candidate, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There is some talk about 400,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>? Did they really give them 400,000 dayan?   

**A:**  It is true. Tsarong had all the details. We are referring to the present Tsarong's father. He was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> office. The money was ordered to be issued from the Trapchi office. A Chinese man looking like a businessman came to collect the cash for the exchange. The money was given to Chairman Ma and Kumbum. They had been told to collect the money from Lhasa. The person who had come to collect this amount was supposed to be very wealthy and he was like a Xining Muslim. When the government was about to issue the money, he said that he would prefer to have it changed into Indian currency and would collect it in India. Therefore, the money was issued to him in Kalimpong. Later, when Tsarong and we were working in the Trapchi office, we came across these records and accounts.   

**Q:**  How much did it amount to in Indian currency?   

**A:**  It should be quite a large sum. During that period, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> was equivalent to about 4 to 5 Indian rupees. Nowadays, it will be much more since one Chinese dayan fetches about 20 to 30 Indian rupees.   

**Q:**  The proclamation about finding the right reincarnation was issued in 1939?   

**A:**  Yes, I think it was somewhere around that time. I have mentioned the exact date and timings in my book. The meeting was held at the chamber of Deden Kyil [Tib. བདེ་ལྡན་དཀྱིལ] and the meeting was known as the Auspicious Meeting (Tib. ཏཤི་ཙོནདུ [བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚོགས་འདུ]). Everyone gathered for the meeting saying that today we will hear some good news.   

**Q:**  This meeting known as 'Tashi Tsondu': did it have some unusual procedures?   

**A:**  No, it was convened as any other meeting, but in the notice it was labeled with such a name. The name indicated some happy occasion so everyone gathered with expectations and happiness.   

**Q:**  During the Tashi Tsondu, would the kalön, attend it too?   

**A:**  No. The shape wouldn't attend. It was presided over by the drungtsi. In the meeting, they presented the various prophesies of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] and Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] They also read out how Phurchok [Tib. ཕུར་མཆོག] Rimpoche, Khangsar Rimpoche and Ketsang Rimpoche had gone about searching, selecting and examining the probable reincarnation for the Dalai Lama and how some of their candidates were rejected by Nechung and finally Ketsang Lama went and found the place and the boy exactly as prophesied by the vision in the Lhamo lake. All the details were presented in sequence and everything was done very efficiently. It was a very well accomplished job and beautifully presented.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were yet to become a Tsipön?   

**A:**  Yes. I was not yet a Tsipön. The first prophecy was indicated (predicted) by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> oracle Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> la [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ལགས] during the first consecration of the Samye monastery in front of the image of Guru Rimpoche known as "Looks like me." [Tib. གུ་རུ་ང་འདྲ་མ]. We were there in the back row as a retinue.   

**Q:**  Was this was the prophecy saying, "The reincarnation of my great master will be coming from the top of the eastern mountain." [Tib. ངེད་ཀྱི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་སློབ་དཔོན་མཐོང་བ་དོན་ལྡན་ཤར་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུན་པོའི་སྤོ་ནས་མེ་གསལ་ལམ]?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a very good verse which Liushar could recite. The prophecy predicted that the reincarnation would be found in the East. The second part of this prophecy was given in the room called Samgsum [Tib. གསང་གསུམ] at the front of the statue of Avalokitsevara. Just as they were going to read out the questions [Tib. ལུང་ཞུ], the oracle seized the letter and without glancing at it rolled it up and put it on his head as a sign of reverence and gave the same prediction. This was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> Oracle. The Gadong Oracle took the questions, looked at it and rolled the paper, again looked at it, and then rolled it, and finally asked them to bring in the seal and placed the stamp on the name of the present Dalai Lama, but there wasn't any prophecy given. Later, it was shown to us at the Tsondu and all people were astonished and the seal looked as if it had slipped on the paper. He gave no prediction verbally and the Gadong Oracle suggested a few prayers to be performed. Now everyone was amazed and accepted this present Dalai Lama as the real reincarnation without doubts or hesitation.   

**Q:**  Then the Regent also told about what he saw in the lake, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And we were told at the meeting that there were problems about the Panchen Lama coming to Tibet, so the Dalai Lama was not officially proclaimed because we thought that would be some problems. It was widely publicized that he was one of the possible candidates and publicized as much as possible about [all] the candidates to be invited. In the Tashi Tsondu they explained all the happenings in detail and said now everything planned has been carried out successfully and the Dalai Lama had reached our territory and there is no possible danger and that is why we have convened this meeting. The Tsondu officially proclaimed the Dalai Lama. The Tsondu lauded the Kashag and the Regent for carrying out this mission so successfully and thanked them. They also requested them to continue their good work by carrying out the enthronement ceremony as soon as possible.   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was a kalön, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

