# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0215.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 W. D. Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] was a very prominent aristocratic government official who held the rank of Tsipön. He is the author of "Tibet: A Political History." In this interview, he discusses the Pandatsang incident in Lhasa and also about how Panda Tobgye rebelled in Kham. The subject discusses in detail about Reting's going on a pilgrimage to see visions in the holy Lake and to his birthplace in Dakpo. Shakabpa also talks in detail about going with Trimön on pilgrimage to Tsari and their contact with the Lopa people.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0215_04/H_0215_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The things which were supposed to be said by Tsarong do not seem to be true. If it was true, you should know about it.   

**A:**  On most of the occasions, I was present.   

**Q:**  Then what happened? Then was it decided to demote Prime Minister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> or to make him just an ex-prime minister?   

**A:**  He would still remain as the Prime Minister in name, but he would not have to go to the office.   

**Q:**  Was this decided by the Tsondu?   

**A:**  The Tsondu suggested this to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  The Tsondu just suggested it?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> reported whatever was agreed upon in the Tsondu to the Kashag. The Kashag said, "Today is the day of exorcism, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག] An exorcism to ward away evil.">torgya</a> [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག] [exorcism rite to get rid of all that is evil] and also the sun has set, so tomorrow before the ceremony we shall talk to the prime minister. So the next day early in the morning, when they went and told this to the prime minister. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> said, "That is fine. If it is done like this, it is very good." At that time, we did not know what was going on. Then he was no more.   

**Q:**  Was it finished on that day itself? There was nothing to talk or deliberate anymore? Was he dismissed so easily?   

**A:**  Yes, it was done very quickly and easily.   

**Q:**  Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble started?   

**A:**  I think the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble started before <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> resigned. I am certain it was at an earlier period.   

**Q:**  How did this Panda’s rebellion start?   

**A:**  I am quite well acquainted with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>tsang. According to what I have heard, it was during the period when Panda was having his accounts audited by the government [Tib. གཞུང་རྩིས]. During the 13th Dalai Lama's reign, all the wool of the Tibetan Government was entrusted to Pandatsang to be sold and the money was to be used for buying Chinese silver [Tib. རྒྱ་དངུལ]. In that year, the government was auditing the accounts of that trade. Panda himself denied having any knowledge about it. At that time, I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> was the Doji.   

**Q:**  During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> episode, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> still in office?   

**A:**  No, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was in Lhasa. The Doji was Trekhang. I think a year after the 13th Dalai Lama passed away or around that time, Norgye Nangpa was the Depön of the Artillery Regiment [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་དམག་སྒར] which was the Markham Border Security Force [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས་ས་སྲུང]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye was the head of militia and he was appointed as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and he went too. He was appointed by the government. Sometime later, when Norgye Nangpa went to the Tsambu area to collect something to be used for the religious offerings for the deceased Dalai Lama, the Panda faction ambushed them at night. However, before this night ambush was staged, they circulated a leaflet. The content of the leaflet was as follows: "When the Dalai Lama has barely passed away, they have banished Kujar and so on. Normally, the government officials come as the Doji and on top of that, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> and the phogpön come to Kham, they give a lot of trouble to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> people. They whip them saying that the Khamba's ears are on their ass [Tib. ཁམས་པའི་ཨམ་མཆོག་རྐུབ་ལ་ཡོད]. They also accused them of robbing [valuable] zi beads [Tib. གཟི] from people's necks and so on. The leaflet further said that they [the Khambas] must take control of the territories up to the Shargongla [Tib. ཤར་གོང་ལ] Pass. This pamphlet was definitely circulated. As a result, there was an armed revolt in those areas. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Depön was not there [at the regiment's headquarters]. Only a rupön was there. He was shot dead and there was talk that his wife and children were also killed. Norgye Nangpa's house was looted and the government soldiers' arms were also taken away. There were 2 cannons which were also taken. When the news about this reached Lhasa, the order was issued to expel them so the Doji took immediate action and expelled them. They ran away further down without fighting. They left Panda's territory going down from Markham to Ba [Tib. འབའ] and then to Pokok. From there they could not be expelled since it was in Chinese territory. The government was talking to the Chinese. In the meantime, Panda's house was surrounded by the soldiers in Lhasa. At that time, Trimön was a shape. The soldiers were stationed on Surkhang's roof top and Köchag's roof top and Panda was surrounded in the middle. However, Panda had bolted his door and would not let anyone enter.   

**Q:**  Normally, when an official comes to seal the door [of a person's house, thus confiscating the property] was it proper to lock the main door?   

**A:**  I don't know for sure if an officer went to seal his door. I wonder? All the negotiations were carried out through the shop entrance. Tshatrutsang and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Phabongkha and Trülku Champa Chödrag [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཆོས་གྲགས] went to the Kashag and they were the people who carried out the negotiations between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> and the government. The gist of the talks was that Tshatrutsang, Trülku Chödrag and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> would take responsibility that no fresh trouble will be started by the Panda faction and furthermore, they would compensate or return whatever had taken from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and the soldiers. Finally, the problem was settled and an agreement was reached.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there something about a shot being fired and a man killed?   

**A:**  The gun went off by accident and it killed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>'s best and favorite horse. Actually a soldier was checking his rifle to see if it was in order and ready to be fired since they were getting ready to confront the surrounded Panda. Probably, they [Pandatsang] tried to oppose.   

**Q:**  When the shot was fired did the police who had so far been surrounding the walls and peeping every now and then, climb down the wall?   

**A:**  No, there was no talk like that. When they heard the shot, all the soldiers nearby loaded their guns fearfully, but fortunately someone shouted. "Don't shoot"   

**Q:**  When the guns were loaded, were they told not to shoot?   

**A:**  Yes, they were told not to shoot. There was lot of confusion. The shops in that area in Lhasa were closed for 2 days. The neighboring markets from the long pole called Sharkyari up to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s area were closed. The roads were also blocked.   

**Q:**  I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön was very helpful and treated <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> very kindly during that time. He helped Panda whatever way he could. There is a song which goes roughly like this, "From the Golden House of Pandatsang; Golden messages were sent; Sawang Trimön on his rooftop: sits counting them." [Tib. གསེར་ཁྱིམ་སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང་ནས། གསེར་གྱི་བརྡ་མ་བཏང་སོང། ས་དབང་ཁྲི་སྨོན་ཐོག་ཁར། གྲངས་ཀ་སྐྱོན་གྱིན་བཞུགས་བཞག].   

**A:**  I never heard this.   

**Q:**  This song has been published in the USA.   

**A:**  I have seen some similar songs written in books. In the old days, most of these songs were sung by the water carriers of the monasteries during the Mönlam festival and other big congregations of the monks. Tibetans believe that these songs contain prophesies and so my late father and grandfather would often ask me what songs were being sung by these water carriers. Later, such songs were sung no more. Later people used this method to criticize and defame their opposition. I don't think such songs like the above were sung by water carriers.   

**Q:**  Such songs were prevalent in olden times?   

**A:**  Not so long ago.   

**Q:**  Then eventually the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble was settled?   

**A:**  Yes, everything became all right.   

**Q:**  Everything was all right?   

**A:**  Then again someone like Künsangtse said that there were some problems left concerning the 2 cannons. While I was there I heard that everything was all right. Norgye Nangpa's destroyed property was compensated with cash.   

**Q:**  I think this most probably occurred in the Wood-Dog Year [1934]. I mean the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> revolt.   

**A:**  I think it was at the end of 1934.   

**Q:**  Then in the year of the Wood-Pig [1935], when Reting went to [the holy lake] Lhamö Lamtso [Tib. ལྷ་མོའི་བླ་མཚོ], were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> among the retinue?   

**A:**  Yes, they were there. I was also there. In fact, I was there from the beginning until the end.   

**Q:**  At that time, how was it done? I mean was that when Samye was being renovated?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. The appointment of people to look after this renovation was done only after returning from there. Parkhang [Tib. པར་ཁང], Shenka [Tib. ཤན་ཁ] and Kungö Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] were appointed as the overseers [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ].   

**Q:**  Was it after they had returned?   

**A:**  It was while they were returning. The Regent had gone for a pilgrimage to Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས]. When he was at Samye he said that it needed renovation and he appointed those people to take charge of this renovation work there.   

**Q:**  Did these appointees first come to see the Regent in Lhasa and later returned to Samye?   

**A:**  No. Parkhang was at that time the Governor of Lhoka Province [Tib. ལྷོ་སྤྱི] and Liushar was the Wön Dzong [Tib. འོན་རྫོང] head. Shenka was probably summoned. He was there at that time.   

**Q:**  Is Shenka and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] the same person?   

**A:**  Yes, he is Shasur.   

**Q:**  What happened at that time? It is not very clear.   

**A:**  I was present at that time. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> stayed behind when we left for Lhasa. Trimön had to go to Reting, so he stayed behind.   

**Q:**  Why did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön stay behind?   

**A:**  It was because Reting had to go to Reting and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> stayed behind. I was the acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> at that time. I was appointed to this post on the basis of my being the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་པ] 1. A secretary in the Tsikhang Office in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. An accountant.">tsipa</a> and hence I was taken along with them. Mentö [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད] who had recently come here was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a> and Trimön's lay official bodyguard, his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a>, Tashilingpa [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་གླིང་པ], was also with us. Reting Rimpoche left for Reting monastery with his retinue and went through Phenpo [Tib. འཕེན་པོ]. We met with Reting in Drigung. Reting came from Lungshö [Tib. ཀླུང་ཤོད]. Trimön went straight up to Yangrigang [Tib. ཡང་རི་སྒང] and from there they went to Thil [Tib. མཐིལ]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> arrived at Thil in the evening while they were still there. He was in charge of the prayers and ritual offerings [Tib. མཆོད་སྤྲིན་དོ་དམ་པ]. The next day Trimön came a little distance from Thil to receive Reting. They also visited the hermit Tsamba Angön [Tib. མཚམས་པ་ཨ་མགོན].   

**Q:**  Were you among those who went to visit Tsamba Angön?   

**A:**  I was there. I was with Reting when he went there. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had gone there the day before and I was with him too.   

**Q:**  What happened? What did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> say to the Tsamba Angön?   

**A:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> reached the retreat, he knocked on the door. There was an outer gate. Trimön knocked at the gate and informed the hermit that he had came from Lhasa. Tsamba Angön asked Trimön why he had come. Trimön explained the reasons and the hermit said, remove the sod (bricks) from my hermitage [the temporary wall build outside the hermitage to keep out visitors] and I will open the door from the inside. So the sod was removed and they were invited inside. We too were invited inside. Then he was requested to give us an initiation. With a ritual arrow with colorful silk sashes tied to it (Tib. ཨ་དདར [མདའ་དར]) in his hand, the hermit gave us all the initiation (Tib. ཝང [དབང]) by placing the arrow on our heads while talking. On the top of the dadar was a small painting of the deity Dechok [Tib. བདེ་མཆོག] and he gave us a little blessing from his tantric offering [Tib. ནང་མཆོད]. He let all the retinue enter his hermitage. Then they sat talking for sometime.   

**Q:**  Was he a good conversationalist?   

**A:**  He answered the questions in a nonsensical [Tib. ཆ་མིན་ཆོ་ལོག] way. You could not make much sense out of his replies. It was rather strange. He was wearing a monk's dress. His hair reached to his shoulders. He was small in stature, and wore a half sleeve brocade vest (Tib. töngag [སྟོད་འགག]). He did not have his shawl (Tib. སེན [གཟན]) on. The next day, when Reting Rimpoche came, the same process was repeated. However, some had already informed him because near his door a white line (Tib. karthik [དཀར་ཐིག]) had been drawn.   

**Q:**  Who drew this line?   

**A:**  I don't know who drew the line, but it was there. The next day, the escort from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> informed the hermit that the Regent had arrived. So the hermit once again asked them to break down the sod. The pieces of sod were quite huge ones.   

**Q:**  At that time had the wall had been put up again? Who put it up again?   

**A:**  After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had visited him, Trimön's servant put it up again.   

**Q:**  You mean when you left the sod pieces were placed back, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he told us to build the sod wall and he closed the door. The Regent, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> and I think, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>, went inside. We stayed outside. There was a small courtyard. We listened from outside. He threw some leather cushion from inside and the Regent sat on that. The Tsamba Angön again gave an initiation and the Regent brought along some incense and tea and offered them to the hermit. We stayed two days at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Thil.   

**Q:**  According to what I have heard, the hermit was supposed to have said that these high officials have broken my hermitages wall and he refused to reenter his hermitage?   

**A:**  I have never heard such a thing. I was present at that time. We had to accompany them wherever they went to visit the holy places. We, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>, had to take down in writing and record these.   

**Q:**  For example, did you have to record in writing that they visited <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Angön?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to record it in the annual book called Kashag Dröndeb [Tib. བཀའ་ཤག་མགྲོན་དེབ]. If any Lama was consulted about the welfare of religion and politics and if they suggested some rites, we would record it, but at that time, probably, they didn't ask him about religion and politics. I don't remember having the record.   

**Q:**  Angön wouldn't reply properly, right?   

**A:**  He was somewhat crazy [Tib. སྨྱོན་པའི་བཟོ་འདྲ་པོ]. But he was very pleasant. He had a shining visage [Tib. མཇལ་སྤྲོ་པོ་འོད་རིལ་འོད་རིལ]. Then we visited the holy places in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>. The Drigung Monastery was quite a huge one. We saw all the sacred relics and objects [Tib. ནང་རྟེན]. There was a holy golden urn [Tib. གསེར་བུམ] which we also visited. We also visited the holy sky burial, Tenjak Durtrö [Tib. གཏན་འཇགས྄་དུར་ཁྲོད]. After visiting all the holy places and shrines, we stayed for 2 days and then went to Yangrigang where we halted for one day. The next day, while returning, we visited Nyima Jangra [Tib. ཉི་མ་ལྕང་ར] where a Buddhist dialectics class [Tib. བཤད་གྲྭ] was in progress. Not far away was the temple Sha Lhagang [Tib. ཞ་ལྷ་ཁང]. We spent the next night at Thugön [Tib.?]. The next day we left for Rinchengang [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་སྒང] which is in Metro Katsal [Tib. mal gro ka tshal ?]. There he was offered a small piece of substance which was supposed to be the heart of the Bodhisattva Changsem Gendün Rinchen [Tib. བྱང་སེམས་དགེ་འདུན་རིན་ཆེན]. He just pressed it and it broke. It was yellowish in color. He gave a tiny piece of it to all of us. The Regent himself ate a tiny piece. We spent that night at Metro Rutok [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་རུ་ཐོག"]. The next day we climbed a small hill and reached Wölga [Tib. འོལ་དགའ] where a reception team was waiting at the place called Wölga Dzingche [Tib. རྫིང་ཆེ].   

**Q:**  Who was the official in charge of Wölga?   

**A:**  [the lay official] Lathog Sungkar [Tib. ལ་ཐོག་ཟུང་མཁར] was the head of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. There was a very holy and strange cave there called Garphug [Tib. མགར་ཕུག] known as the cave of Garmi Yönden Yungdrung [Tib. མགར་མི་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱུང་གྲུང]. In Dzingche there was a beautiful statue of the Maitreya Buddha, Gyalwa Champa [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་བྱམས་པ] which was supposed to have been made during the time of the Great Tsongkhapa [Tib. ཙོང་ཁ་པ]. The statue and its background murals were done excellently. Now there was another very strange cave known as the cave of the protective deity Pehar [Tib. པེ་ཧར་བྲག་ཕུག]. To this cave, the dzong had to offer a whole carcass of sheep every year. Since they offered the carcass every year, the cave was filled up with carcasses, so we had to go under the carcasses and the horns and legs would touch our heads. The interior of the cave was completely dark. The caretaker of the cave and another person were sent first with torches and people were sent in to apply gold to the statues. After them the Regent and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> went in and when they came out, they sat near the entrance of the cave and then we were sent in one by one. When we came out, the Regent looked us over and smiled. I just wondered at his peculiar behavior. When I entered the cave it was quite scary. In the darkness you had to walk with your heads bowed, otherwise the horns and the legs of the carcass would touch you. The stench of the dried carcass was very strong. When I entered, I found that it was not so scary, because the person in charge of the place and the other person applying the gold were waiting in front of the statue with torches. The face of the statue was a peaceful one, with its lips curled up and wearing a flat hat. I did not have the courage to study the statue very carefully. I prayed hurriedly and left. We had an artist among us and he said that the statue looked strangely alive and life-like. Phala, who was then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> told me when I asked him why everyone was looking at each other sniggering all the while, he said that sometimes a scorpion clings on your body when you come out, that's why everyone was scrutinizing each other to see if anyone had one. If anyone did have one clinging to his body, he was considered to be very fortunate for it was a sign that the deity has granted him his protection. Fortunately, or unfortunately, no one was conferred this honor. It was really stupid. If they told people that there are scorpions in there, people won't dare to get in, right?   

**Q:**  Is the scorpion supposed to be the protective deity's symbolic pet?   

**A:**  Yes. That was the belief.   

**Q:**  So the cave was filled with so much meat, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The cave was filled up with the offerings of meat every year. The meat would rot and naturally insects have infested them. So we went into such a cave. The Regent went in first and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> followed him.   

**Q:**  Did the Regent have a scorpion clinging on his body?   

**A:**  No. If he had one, we would have seen it. The Regent and others were waiting at the entrance and examining everyone to see if anyone had one.   

**Q:**  The cave is filled up with such carcasses. Is it in Dzingche?   

**A:**  Yes. The yearly offering piled up and the meat dried up and disintegrated The carcasses were about two or three hundred years old.   

**Q:**  Was there any meat in front of the deity?   

**A:**  In front of the statue, there was sort of an altar on which offerings were arranged.   

**Q:**  Were the meat offerings placed around the altar?   

**A:**  There was a path and we had to bend down while going, because the horns and rib bones etc hurt our heads.   

**Q:**  Did they ever take out the carcasses?   

**A:**  No. They were never taken out. The state was extraordinarily strange and pious. I think we stayed in that area for two days.   

**Q:**  Did the Regent perform ritual prayers to invoke the diety?   

**A:**  Yes. There were about 20 monks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] The monastery of the Dalai Lama located in the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Namgye Tratsang</a> among the retinue.   

**Q:**  Did everyone say that the statue was very life-like or alive?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that it was just like a living person. The painter Paljor Gyalpo la [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱལ་པོ] also told me so. He said the statue looked wet and one could feel the steam rising from it. Paljor Gyalpo was well known to me. He used to live in the Trekhang House's compound. He further told me that the statue was dressed in a woolen felt vest called Töle [Tib. སྟོད་ལྷེ] which too was wet and had steam rising from it. From this place, we left for Samdengling [Tib. བསམ་གཏན་གླིང] where Tsongkhapa preached the Lamrim doctrine and the scripture of the Lamrim used by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a> was there. It was a very beautiful place. We did not halt at this place and continued our journey and reached a bridge called Sersam Sampa [Tib. གསེར་ཟམ་ཟམ་པ]. There was an open place and we pitched our tents and stayed for the night. I took a photograph of Reting and his retinue on this bridge. I think this bridge is among the more famous of its kind. The next day, we left for Gyel Logla [Tib. རྒྱལ་གློག྄་ལ], where the sacred lake where the life of the Garuda Deity, Yeshe Khyungtra [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཁྱུང་ཁྲ] was attached [Tib. བླ་མཚོ]. The lake was not very big and its shape is like the letter 'D'.   

**Q:**  Who gave the initiation?   

**A:**  The offerings to the deities were done by the monks of the Dalai Lama's personal college, Namgye Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any food arrangement?   

**A:**  Some tea and probably a midday meal [Tib. ཚ་ཕོག] were served. Tsapok means some sort of snacks taken around 11 A.M. or 4 P.M when travelling.   

**Q:**  Usually, this place was regarded as a rough place [Tib. འཚུབ་པོ], right?   

**A:**  I am not sure about that.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any vision in the lake?   

**A:**  No, not at all.   

**Q:**  Is this lake considered to be very rough normally?   

**A:**  This is the life lake of 5 garuda deities and therefore it is quite rough. After a little more traveling, we reached Gyama where our camp was put up at an open area. The next day from Gyama we went to Gyel, which is in South Tibet. In Gyel, all the people from Ngagpa, Dakpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ] and Gyel had gathered there. Of course, the monks of the Dakpo Monastery had also come there and monks of the Chöngorgye [Tib. ཆོས་འཁོར་རྒྱལ] were there. It was the life lake of Shri Devi Remati [Tib. རེ་མ་ཏི]. So the monks from Dakpo monastery remained at Chöngorgye.   

**Q:**  Had the Ngari monks arrived yet?   

**A:**  Most probably. It was during the summer retreat period. Whatever may be, all three monasteries' monks were gathered there. It was a very large gathering and arrangements were made on an elaborate scale. In the evening, all the monks of Dakpo monastery would sit on one side. Ngari monastery sat on another side and they would debate late into the night until the stars became visible. Sometimes there would be inter-debates between the two monasteries. It was very nice and lively. Of course, Nornang Geshe la [Tib. ནོར་ནང་དགེ་བཤེས་ལགས] of Dakpo monastery was present. In Chöngorgye we visited numerous precious images of deities. In Gyel itself there was the image of Mahakala, Gombo Kothim [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཀོ་འཐིམ]. It was said that the Mahakala had dissolved himself into a leather seat Komden [Tib. ཀོ་གདན]'. We saw this leather seat along with the image.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, can people still see this leather seat and also the statue of the Mahakala?   

**A:**  There was only the leather seat. There was also the female deity Gung Ngönma [Tib. གུང་སྔོན་མ] in the form of a small statue. Then there was a chapel of the protector deity called Kanyan Gönkhang [Tib. བཀའ་གཉན་མགོན་ཁང] which was considered to be very dangerous and active. This was not for ordinary visitors. It was only unveiled for the Dalai Lama or the Regent. Whenever they opened it, then they carried out any repairs or renovations needed. Fresh offerings are also made at that time by the official in charge of making offerings. After that they locked it up. It was a very interesting and important chapel. There were the clay statues of Yama [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] and Chögyal [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ] surrounded by numerous other deities. The priest pointed out a rather strange scene to us. In the Chögyal's mouth there was a rat clamped in between the teeth. It looked as if the image had been alive and the rat was caught while trying to escape. We tried to pull it out, but it would not budge.   

**Q:**  Maybe a big rat went in and while trying to squeeze in the teeth of the image must have pierced its stomach and therefore got stuck there?   

**A:**  I don't know what a scientist would say, but as far as we are concerned, we believe that it was bitten by the deity. The master, Lobpön Sonam [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན་བསོད་ནམས] of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] The monastery of the Dalai Lama located in the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Namgye Tratsang</a> was with us. The late 13th Dalai Lama used to be very good to him. He showed us this strange sight. At that time, they told Sonam La to try to dislodge the dead rat and they said, "Please be careful least you break the teeth of the statue." Both the Regent and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> saw this. Then he dislodged the rat and stuffed medicine power in the mouth. He told us that during a previous visit either by the Regent or a Dalai Lama to this chapel, again there was either a rat or a frog stuck in the teeth of this statue. We saw this too. The dead body of the rat was completely dry but the statue was made from mud. It was rather strange and baffling. In the middle, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> offerings were displayed. Then we went to see the lake also.   

**Q:**  What does Gatsel [Tib. དགའ་ཚལ] mean?   

**A:**  Gatsel means the place where the second Dalai Lama Gendün Gyatso [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་རྒྱ་མཚོ]] and the third Dalai Lama Sonam Gyatso [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ] used to live. There were 2 places known as Gatsel and Potala. It was situated at the foot of the hill. It was a branch of Chöngorgye.   

**Q:**  Actually, was there some sort of monastery formed?   

**A:**  From there you had to go up because no one was living there. Then he offered whatever prayers he had to offer at Chöngorgye and then we left to visit the lake.   

**Q:**  Was it nearby?   

**A:**  No, it was not nearby. You had to travel for some time on horseback. You entered a valley and traveled on horse for about 3 hours. On the way, you came across 2 more important lakes. The life lakes of 2 retinues of the Shri Devi (Remati). One was the crocodile faced deity and the other was the lion faced deity [Tib. ཆུ་སེང་གདོང་ཅན]. They said that you should not look at these lakes because if you saw visions there, you would not get to see the visions at the main lake. Therefore, people tried not to look at these lakes. We averted our gaze so as not to look at these lakes by chance. We had to ride very close by these lakes but tried to avoid looking at them. The life lake of the 2 retinues of Shri Devi was actually one lake, but with 2 portions.   

**Q:**  Was it one lake or 2 lakes?   

**A:**  There are 2 different lakes but you can say it is one lake in the sense that the lake becomes very narrow in the middle, like an ant's waist. After that we found an open space on top of the mountain where we built temporary camps and offered prayers to the deity Remati. The prayers were chanted in great details with full ritual music. When you look down from the peak, you can see the lake which appears Turquoise blue. From there we had to walk down individually without making any noise. They say if you go down with your friends you do not see any vision. So, we all went separately.   

**Q:**  What about the servants?   

**A:**  No. We went down separately without any servants or companions, but I did not see any vision. I sat and sat, but no vision appeared to me. I went down 3 times, but I had no luck. Reting Rimpoche, however had a vision, but he did not disclose it to us. Before departing Chöngorgye, people started talking about the visions the Regent had seen but he would not make any comment. Later he made announcements about his vision in the Tsondu meeting.   

**Q:**  What about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>?   

**A:**  Probably, he had some, but nobody asked him and he did not say anything about seeing a vision. We did not ask him and he didn't say anything about it. After that we went down to offer the things to be thrown in the lake (Tib. ཚོཛེ [མཚོ་རྫས]). We went down on a riding Yak called Nalo [Tib. སྣ་ལོ]. They had made the arrangements already.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay at the lake of the visions?   

**A:**  People hid in between the rocks and tried to get visions for 2 to 3 hours. I saw the servants walking up and down quietly carrying the thermos flasks for the Regent. We had nothing for ourselves. After some time, we were called forth to make offerings to the lake on behalf of the Kashag. I went up to the edge of the lake. At the end of the lake the water was rushing in [Tib. རྒྱུགས] and there they have made steps where you can walk over and so we went over them and made our offerings. Actually the lake is round in shape. The running water flows in the upper area, the Dakpo side. At the lower part of the lake there was a way to make offerings.   

**Q:**  How long did you have to walk from the top of the peak down to the lake?   

**A:**  Since it was downhill it was easy, but going up was very difficult.   

**Q:**  Was there a good path for walking?   

**A:**  It was like the distance from the Dharamsala market to the Kashag office. There was some kind of trail for the yaks. The Regent and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> rode on yaks but we went on foot. However, while going back up the mountain, we had yaks to ride. Since I was busy doing something, I could not get a yak, since all of them had been taken by the others. I still remember the climb which I had to make on foot. It was literally an uphill task all the way. When we made the offerings to the lake, it was something at the middle portion of the lake to which you can walk on steps. From there it becomes one of the deepest areas of the lake. So we made the offerings there.   

**Q:**  Did you make the offerings at the head of the lake?   

**A:**  They had built a kind of wall like a dam from the edge of the lake to the middle of the lake where it was probably the deepest. We had to make the offering in that place.   

**Q:**  How were the steps? How did it look?   

**A:**  It looked like a dam built from the edge of the lake. There were lots of offerings made to the lake. There were boxes, urns, porcelain bowls, silver bangles and other similar ornaments. Since the lake was crystal clear, you can see most of these objects very distinctly.   

**Q:**  Was the lake very deep?   

**A:**  In the center it must be very deep. After that we returned up the mountain and by the time we reached there it was 3 or 4 in the afternoon. We were served food. When we reached Chöngorgye, it was completely dark. The Regent, I think, went back 3 or 4 times to the lake.   

**Q:**  Did he return from Chöngorgye to the lake again?   

**A:**  That time he went very quietly with only a few servants. His first visit was very ceremonial with all his retinue. His second visit was a brief one. When I say a brief visit I don't mean the visit was only for a short period. I mean he went only with a few attendants with no pomp or ceremony. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> also visited the lakes twice and on both occasions I accompanied him, so I made 3 visits to the lake. On all the 3 occasions, no visions appeared to me.   

**Q:**  Why did they visit the lake again and again?   

**A:**  I don't know. After that we went to another lake called Jamsing Latsho [Tib. ལྕམ་སྲིང་བླ་མཚོ]. This lake was believed to be a very wrathful one [Tib. བཀའ་གཉན་པོ]. On the way it started snowing very heavily. We lost our way every now and then and it was very difficult to walk in the snow so we slide a lot. When we reached down there, they had put up tents and all the other arrangements were made. The people of the area were very, very kind to us. So we made our offerings to the lake and went around it. I was quite scared and I didn't dare to go because it was very slippery. So I did not go. You had to be very careful, because the snow was very slippery and if you slipped then you went straight into the lake. The Regent did not go, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> went carrying a walking stick. I told him it was better not to go, but he insisted and went. A few of the monks of the Namgye Monastery went. The rest of us did not go. While we were making the offerings, the weather cleared. Otherwise the weather was very rough. Soon a hailstorm broke out and we had to protect ourselves with raincoats. After that at Chöngorgye Monastery, all the monks of Ngari, Dakpo and Chöngorgye gathered and they performed a religion dance (Tib. ཆམ [འཆམ]). Another interesting thing to be noted here was a very interesting little mask which was known as Senbak Mugchung [Tib. བསེ་འབག་སྨུག་ཆུང] of the deity Tsimara [Tib. ཙི་དམར་བ]. It belonged to one of the protector deity's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགོན་ཁང] A chapel devoted to a protector deity.">gönkhang</a> in the Gyel monastery. There they made a big offering to the Protector deity along with the monks of Namgye Tratsang. All the people were gathered there. The mask was in a box which was kept safe on a table. After some time, the Regent opened the box. The mask was wrapped in silk sashes of multiple colors. He unwrapped the mask and put it on his own face and looked around so that the crowd could view it. It was a very terrifying mask. This gesture shows that the Regent spiritually had a very high realization [Tib. རྟོགས་པ་མཐོ་པོ] because if you did not, you would not be able to wear it for it was an awesome and terrifying mask. He not only wore the mask, but looked around at the crowd so that they could see it clearly.   

**Q:**  What type of mask was it?   

**A:**  It was the mask of Tsimara and it was red in color with the upper teeth on the lower lip. The Regent wore it and showed it to the crowd. Reting really had a high realization, otherwise, he would not have dared to open it.   

**Q:**  Did the mask have one eye or two eyes?   

**A:**  The mask had 3 eyes. After that we went to the Gyel Lhathok [Tib. རྒྱལ་ལྷ་ཐོག]. It was the monastery of the famous Namkha Gyentsen [Tib. nam mka' rgyal mtshan].   

**Q:**  At that time, had Reting got all his things [visions]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you see there?   

**A:**  There was a small hermitage that belonged to Namkha Gyentsen. Nearby there were a few small lakes. It was a very high and quiet area. After that we went to Dakpo Gyatsa [Tib. dwags po rhya ysha] where Reting Rimpoche himself was born. His family house was there. The area had very pleasant weather, neither too warm nor too cold. Very similar to Kalimpong's weather. Maize, walnuts, and peaches were growing. However, the area itself was very poor. Even this family was very poor. At the place where Reting was born, they had built a small temple which we call the Tseju Lhagang [Tib. ཚེས་བཅུ] where the people gathered on the 10th and 25th of every month to pray and make offerings. Near the door of the temple was a huge rock and it was said that when the present Reting Rimpoche was very young he stuck a wooden peg/stake in the rock.   

**Q:**  Were some small pieces of the peg left there?   

**A:**  No, there weren't. He had told his parents that tomorrow some visitors are coming to see me and they need this to tie their horses. We can still see this miracle, but there wasn't very much of the wooden peg left because pilgrims visiting this place took pieces of wood from this peg as a religious souvenirs. I saw this with my own eyes. When we reached his birthplace, he looked very happy. At that time he was the Regent and he was young, but he was very particular about everything. He cared about everything like food, horses, dresses, and servants. His horses and mules were excellent. His servants were very well dressed. His tent was tremendously elaborate. We reached there quite late in the evening, just before the sun had set. The next day we had the Drungja. Almost every morning we had a Drungja. During the Drungja all his relatives were given audiences in his room. They brought gifts and presents to the Regent. The better ones brought tsamphor [Tib. རྟམ་ཕོར] (wooden bowls in which you keep tsamba). Some came with samdra and others presented wooden tables. Most of these people were swarthy looking with goiters and ugly features.   

**Q:**  What did the Regent give them in return?   

**A:**  I heard that in return he gave them many gifts that gave them a basis for making a living [Tib. འཚོ་རྟེན]. Since it was his hometown, we stayed there for 10 days.   

**Q:**  Weren't the Regent's parents there?   

**A:**  There were not. He had brought his close relatives from Central Tibet. His other relatives in this village he met and they sat in the tents put up in the fields. They enjoyed each other's company for 10 days. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> took leave and left earlier for a pilgrimage to Tsari [Tib. ཙ་རི]. He stayed only for 5 days at the Regent's birthplace and then he went to Dakla Gambo [Tib. དྭགས་ལྷ་སྒམ་པོ] and from there to Tsari.   

**Q:**  Where is Dakla Gambo and what does it look like?   

**A:**  It is a very beautiful and very enjoyable place. There is a place called Sanglung [Tib. བཟང་ལུང] which was the Nyelmei Dakpo Lhaje's [Tib. གཉལ་མེད་དྭགས་པོ་ལྷ་རྗེ] meditation and retreat areas. The roads were very primitive with Ja [Tib. ca ?] and you had to cross the gorges through very primitive suspension bridges made out of bamboos attached to rocks. Inside the hermitage, there were numerous priceless icons and statues.   

**Q:**  What does Ja mean?   

**A:**  Ja means a bridge made by piercing holes in rocks and fastening a bamboo bridge to them.   

**Q:**  What do you call the steps or ladders made by piercing the surface of cliffs?   

**A:**  I don't know what they are called, but these Ja are not what you described. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> stayed there for 2 days and then he left and we went to Dakpo Ganden Rabten [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་རབ་བརྟན]. From there he had to cross a river where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> River [Tib. གཙང་ཆུ] and the Central Tibet river [Tib. དབུས་ཆུ] joined together. We crossed the river in coracles. For safety reasons, they joined 2 small coracles and only 2 people were ferried across at a time. Dakpo Ganden Rabten was situated just across this river. Trimön met Kujar Tashi Thöndrub [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དོན་གྲུབ] at Dakpo. He had been exiled by the government after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. He came to see Trimön one night. Trimön was welcomed and invited by the head of Dakpo Kurab Namgye Dzong [Tib. སྐུ་རབ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. They had made all the arrangements for Trimön.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> visit all the places in the Tsari area?   

**A:**  He went on the middle circumambulation route [Tib. བར་སྐོར]. He did not go on the lower circumambulation [Tib. རོང་སྐོར].   

**Q:**  Did you have any trouble with the tribal people called Lopa?   

**A:** There were tribal people, but they did not threaten or harm us. These tribal people were like any other people. They ambushed and killed travelers only because they were made to suffer and they were scared of us. They did not trust us since our people have been so unfair and cruel to them and forced them to swear allegiance. They attacked only in retaliation because we pushed them too far without caring about their sentiments. These tribal people felt that the government was not being fair with them by making them swear to accept certain conditions against their will. The Lopas were thinking that the government would give them their share of things, but the government just gave them some inferior kind of rugs, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and barley. I met many of these tribal people and took a few pictures of them and they didn't do anything to us. We didn't need to be afraid of them. They would come to Chösom around the camp and bring firewood for us and in return ask for food. They would sleep around the camps. If we left them alone, they never gave us any trouble. First we reached a place called Buda Sumbum, then to Chösom, and then onward to Domtsen and then Jickjar and finally we crossed the Drolma La [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ་ལ] mountain pass.   

**Q:**  Is Jickjar the name of the place?   

**A:**  Yes, it is the name of a place. There was a beautiful statue of Dorje Phagmo [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕག་མོ] there. The next day we crossed the Digpala [Tib. སྡིག་པ་ལ] mountain pass. There was another place whose name I have forgotten. There they had a place where pilgrims could rest, eat and sleep. It was arranged by the Doring [Tib. རྡོ་རིང] family. The next day we reached Phodrang Yutso [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གཡུ་མཚོ] where similar facilities were available. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had a lot of people accompanying him from Dakpo. The next day, we went to Dakpo Mendregang [Tib. མན་དྲལ་སྒང]. From Mendregang you get a panoramic view of Dakpo Shelri [Tib. དྭག་པོ་ཤེལ་རི] (Crystal mountain). When we reached this mountain, people told me that if you take its photograph, some harm will come to your eyes and some say it will not appear in the photo. Anyway, I closed my eyes and took two photos. The results contradicted my companion's foreboding advice. One picture was not very clear, it looked blurred because of the fog, but the other showed a clear and beautiful picture of Crystal mountain. From there we went to a place called Khandro Dora [Tib. མཁའ་འགྲོའི་དོ་ར] and from there we went to place called Taktsangrong [Tib. སྟག་ཚང་རོང] and then to Thomtshang [Tib. དོམ་ཚང]. After crossing a very dangerous swinging bridge, we reached a tiny place called Phara Jagthag Trang [Tib. ཕ་ར་ལྕགས་ཐག་འཕྲང] and Gyare Kubtsug Trang [Tib. རྒྱ་རས་རྐུབ་བཙུགས་འཕྲང]. It was said that when the sage <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Gyare [Tib. གཙང་པ་རྒྱ་རལ] passed this passage, he put his rear end down there. From there we went back to Chösom. It took about 5 or 6 days.   

**Q:**  This was the middle circumambulation route of the Tsari, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Normally Tsari was divided into 3 parts - the lower circumambulation route, the middle circumambulation route and also the top circumambulation route [Tib. རྩེ་སྐོར]. Is this correct?   

**A:**  Yes, the upper one was the shortest.   

**Q:**  When Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> went to Tsari, wasn't there some trouble and some people were killed?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the lower circumambulation route and there was some problem. When Tsarong went there, he went with great pomp and show. He said that they are nothing but savages. They fired a few rounds of shots and caught a few of them and beat them up. The Lopa retaliated by setting traps and ambushes on their way. Later on, when another government representative was sent to give them gifts and when the Lopas were reluctant to come out, they also caught them and treated them with brutality and beat them with wooden switches. They stopped them from going from one place to another and forcibly made them swear allegiance. The Lopa didn't have any idea about the law and they retaliated by ambushing innocent pilgrims, killing them and robbing them. We had been looking down on them as savages and ignored them and spoiled them. They were given the name Lopa which mean "barbarian." But the Lopa were very clever and most of them were very handsome and pretty. I took a lot of photographs of them. Some of their women were really beautiful. They fold their hair with bamboo and placed ornaments around their neck and waist. The men wore a kind of underpants and animal teeth and claws around their neck. They were armed with knives, swords, bow and arrows and spears. When we reached the place called Yümai [Tib. ཡུལ་སྨད], we found the Lopas were just human beings [like us]. They smoked tobacco in pipes made out of bamboo. When we got to the lower parts, we saw a lot of them. If you did not bother them they just watched us and left us alone. Here we made offerings of a thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a>. The Lopa would come to beg for these tsog. When we did the tsog offerings, all the local people of the area came and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> and danced. Even the Lopa came and built a big fire and watched the whole proceedings. The local people told us that if you leave them alone, they do not harm you at all. Sometimes they bartered with them.   

**Q:**  Where did these Lopa live?   

**A:**  I think they lived in the same area in the forests.   

**Q:**  Was Tsari located in the northern part of the river which belonged to Tibet?   

**A:**  [Shakabpa did not give any comment - silence] After that Reting Rimpoche went to Dagla Gambo after staying for 10 days at his village. There he worshipped the deities of his birthplace (Trungsöl [Tib. འཁྲུང་གསོལ]).   

**Q:**  What does Trungsöl mean?   

**A:**  Trungsöl means making offerings and prayers to the protector deity of the place where one was born.   

**Q:**  Earlier you mentioned that Reting Rimpoche gave official audiences to his relatives. Didn't he give any private audience to any of his relatives? Didn't he call any of them to his private chamber to talk with them?   

**A:**  I do not know about that, but during the Drungja, he met them. Then he went to Wölga, where we went to Chölung Gyaltsog Lhading [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚོགས་ལྷ་ལྡིང], but we didn't see that. After that, we went to Sangri Khangmar [Tib. ཟངས་རི་ཁང་དམར]. In that place arrangements were made by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] The name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families.">Samdru Phodrang</a> [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] at a place called Norbu Linga. He was staying there. By this time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön had completed his tour of Tsari and he came through Dakpo to Yartö Drakla [Tib. ཡར་སྟོད་བྲག་ལ] and then through Yarlung he came down.   

**Q:**  While coming from Tsari through Yarlung, did he come across E Chundogyang [Tib. e qu mdo kyang]? Did he go to Nyal [Tib. གཉལ]?   

**A:**  He wouldn't have reached Nyal. From Tsari he went to Dakpo at a place called Lhakok [Tib. ལྷ་ཁོག] which is a part of the Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི] estate and finally reached Sangri Khangmar where Reting was camped.   

