# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0215.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 W. D. Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] was a very prominent aristocratic government official who held the rank of Tsipön. He is the author of "Tibet: A Political History." In this interview, he discusses how Taktra was honest and fair in the beginning, using the example of the incident with the lay official Dingja. The subject also talks about how Surkhang and Kapshöba didn't get along well and how Künsangtse and Khyungram were demoted. He also explains in detail the procedures involved when the government officials went to receive the new incarnation of the Dalai Lama at Nagchuka. He also discusses the plot of Reting against Taktra.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0215_08/H_0215_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  In that first year [of Taktra's reign] there was an incident involving the lay official Dingja [Tib. ལྡིང་བྱ]. He was supposed to be the Yarsor official, but he made excuses and asked for the permission to be the Yarsor the next year. After Dingja, this job fell [by turns] on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> who had just returned from Kham [a difficult posting]. The Tsikhang gave a favorable decision allowing Dingja to be excused. At that time, the Tsikhang kind of favored Dingja and submitted a plan. This was corrected a little, but still was supported by the Kashag. Then the proposed decision finally went to the Regent. Instead of approving this, the Regent made a complete change and [in the process] gave a strong warning that people have to be careful, etc. Even the tsipön, when the note came back to them said among themselves that, "Well, it looks as if he is going to be straightforward and honest. Even I thought that it he would be a good Regent if he could do things like this without partiality. However, later it became very bad and even for appointments of the sawang, etc., this was not followed and they destroyed this great Lama completely.   

**Q:**  It was mainly done by the Chandzö Chemmo [the Regent's chandzö] and probably the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> also, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was the latter <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a>, Thubden Lengmön, the one who walked with a limp. This limping nendrön has had much bad said about him. Before the limping man came into office, the nendrön was Ngawang Namgyel, who later became the Jigyab Khembo. He had a big nose. It was said that he had acted slightly fair while the present nendrön was not getting along well even with the Ta Lama.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it the Ta Lama who was responsible for bringing him into this position?   

**A:**  Yes, I have heard that too.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he brought from Trip [Tib. གྲིབ] or somewhere directly to this position?   

**A:**  No. He was the head of Samye Dzong. It was from there he went directly. This was a tremendous jump for him. And Ta Lama did it. But later he could not get along well with Ta Lama. The talk at that time was about what accounted for such a huge jump. They said it was because he was very capable. Later I discovered that he was not capable, but he was a very mean and evil-minded person, but pretended not to be like that. He was really something. He only served as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> for a short time, three years.   

**Q:**  No he was there for a longer time.   

**A:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was demoted, wasn't he already <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a>?   

**Q:**  Yes, I heard he was there and he even instructed his subordinate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> to keep a stick and if <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> touched inside his pocket go ahead and beat him.   

**A:**  Yes, yes, it was very strange for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> because he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> already.   

**Q:**  While talking about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, I have heard that Kapshöba did not get along well with Surkhang and that Surkhang didn't like some of Kapshöba's comments and sniffed with his nose [Tib. སྣ་ཤུ] [a jeer] and walked out of the Kashag meeting. This was just before Kapshöba was thrown out.   

**A:**  I don't know about this. I heard from Liushar who was in the foreign office about once when he went to consult the Kashag about a gift to be carried by the two officials who went on the Victory Congratulations Mission [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས] for the allies-- China, Britain and America [in World War II]. I don't remember exactly, but Liushar was the one in charge of the Foreign Office, and he went to consult with the Kashag about designing of a gift for the Allies. The Foreign Office had to propose the design. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> gave certain designs about which Surkhang made an adverse remark that if you do like this it will look like that [didn't remember the exact comment, only that it was negative]. Thus Kapshöba had to drop his suggestion. After that they discussed what would be better. Then Surkhang gave some suggestions for which Kapshöba made even a more sarcastic comment. So Liushar felt very embarrassed.   

**Q:**  I have heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> had made certain remarks when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> made the report to the Kashag and one day Surkhang told him, "I will speak first and if there is something I have left out then you can talk."   

**A:**  That wouldn't be true. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was there, so how could they do it. All have to have strong respect for Lukhangwa, because he was very straightforward and honest. During the tenure of Lukhangwa as tsipön, the Kashag would never make adverse remarks like scolding to the tsipön at all. It was more or less because of Lukhangwa. As a person, he wears very poor clothes, has a terrible horse, and horrible servants, but as far as his responsibilities are concerned, he will insist and fight for things and see they gets done for the best interests. And if there are things he has to say, he will speak very openly without any hesitation either within the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> or in the Tsikhang or even with the Kashag or the Tsondu. So everybody had very high regard for him and it would be impossible to make adverse [personal attacks] remarks about the shape while he was there. So when I was there as a tsipön and going to the Kashag, I never saw any such thing. Everything always looked beautiful and nice. [there were no incidents like this]. When the drungtsi came they always look very nice.   

**Q:**  Probably, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was very capable, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was there, he always was very tactful [Tib. མཁས་པོ] and would praise the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> making them happy. Kapshöba spoke very nicely.   

**Q:**  I heard that the lashing of the Lhundrup Dzong monks was because of Kapshöba.   

**A:**  He even hit the monk Rebe Gyawu on the head with the samdra.   

**Q:**  I've heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> even corrected the edict that sent Rebe Gyawu to Hor Drachen and later Rebe saw that the correction said, "This is the root of all poison." [Tib. དུག་རྩ་བོང་ནག]. So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> should not let him evade punishment [Tib. ཡན་པོར་མ་གཏོང]."   

**A:**  No, it can't be. He was not allowed to do that. I was there as an Investigator Committee member. He would never dare to do it.   

**Q:**  This Rebe Gyawu has told people that he had seen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> doing it (adding words to alter the decision).   

**A:**  It's impossible. I'm not inclined to accept this. And how could Rebe Gyawu have seen it?   

**Q:**  Rebe Gyawu saw it later in Drachen.   

**A:**  I mean, how could he know that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> made the corrections?   

**Q:**  While he was about to be sent, he saw <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> take out the edict and add something.   

**A:**  At that time we were also there.   

**Q:**  Rebe Gyawu told this to many people after he came back and he told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Könchog Samden [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན] in Drachen Dzong. At that time, it was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was said to be a kind of patron to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> College. So probably he was acting kind of two-faced. I heard that Rebe Gyawu thought that Kapshöba might have made it better, but when he looked at it in Drachen he found that he made the correction mentioned above.   

**A:**  I still can't believe this, because all the edicts were sealed by the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Probably, they have to read it, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the verdicts had to be read.   

**Q:**  He said that after the reading, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> took it and made the corrections.   

**A:**  Oh my! To tell you the truth, I swear by the three jewels that I don't remember that. After they were given the departure lashing, soldiers came and took them away. However, as I told you, one day [earlier] he tried to correct one of the Tsondu documents but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> both shouted a lot at him. But this was much earlier when they wanted to give a retirement gift to Regent as token of appreciation. It was at this time. During this time, the Töpa Khembo created a lot of problems.   

**Q:**  Where was that Töpa Khembo from?   

**A:**  I don't know. He had a kind of darkish face. I was told he was very learned, but he created a real mess.   

**Q:**  As for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>, what he was supposed to have said was not directly aimed at Reting. Isn't that true?   

**A:**  Look, I was at the Tsondu. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> did say that, but he didn't say it so obviously, and mentioned it more as a casual remark. So the Töpa Khembo immediately repeated the words and said that you are saying this against Reting. Such a thing happened and this hurt Reting very much. I was there in the meeting. It was held in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> in the room known as Songjong [Tib. ཟུར་འཕྱོངས]. This was a very bad incident. So, coming back to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, he did all sort of weird things like that.   

**Q:**  I heard that Reting and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> were very close before. And not only was he close, but it was Khyungram who insisted that Reting not resign when Reting pushed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> out.   

**A:**  Yes. I was there even then. We went to Reting's summer cottage in Shide. At that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> not only spoke strongly, but prostrated before Reting. I was there.   

**Q:**  Then what happened after that?   

**A:**  Because of this remark, people said that their relationship deteriorated.   

**Q:**  Do you consider this as one of the worst acts of Reting?   

**A:**  Yes. This one and the Künsangtse incident.   

**Q:**  What happened to Künsangtse?   

**A:**  That was written by Künsangtse himself in detail. That was true.   

**Q:**  Is that the only reason why he punished Künsangtse?   

**A:**  I don't know. But it was definitely done very severely during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] The &quot;Yogurt&quot; Festival held in Lhasa to celebrate the end of the monks&#x27; summer retreat in the middle of the 5th lunar month (usually August). It was a time when Tibetan Operas were performed.">Shodön</a> [opera], in Lhasa. [this was very shocking since it was in done the mist of lots and lots of people]. It was on the day of Shodön and it was very humiliating that in front of the public you have your official's hair knot cut off and your dress and official boots removed. Even though he didn't have to walk through the public and could leave through a side door, the timing was such that Reting did this in a very cruel manner. I don't know what the reason for this was.   

**Q:**  I heard that the other Künsangtse Dzasa who was in the search party of Dalai Lama was having some problems with Ketsang Rimpoche and Khyenrabla.   

**A:**  No, that is not likely because what I heard was that Ketsang Rimpoche was the head and Khyenrabla [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ་ལགས], who was the Nagchu Khembo [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་མཁན་པོ] at the time, was a staff member, and Lobsang Tsewang [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་དབང] was also a staff member. And it was not mentioned at all in Künsangtse's book.   

**Q:**  I had a talk with Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] Khenjung who is in Nepal.   

**A:**  Yes, he will definitely know since he was there.   

**Q:**  Khenjung told me something, but I wanted to recheck. As you well know, he sometimes exaggerates and sometimes he makes up things and covers up others.   

**A:**  Yes, he definitely does that.   

**Q:**  Khenjung had told me a lot about how Künsangtse didn't do well so Ketsang Rimpoche had difficulty getting good cooperation with Reting Rimpoche. He said that he was acting difficult and that certain letters that Ketsang Rimpoche had sent to Reting never reached there because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> didn't deliver them to Reting Rimpoche and he had to come to Lhasa himself as a real messenger.   

**A:**  I have never heard that. Did he say that?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  You have to be careful, because he makes lot of huge different stories though he is a nice person. If what he said was true, there was a reason for punishing Künsangtse.   

**A:**  Even if that was true, why should he punish his other family members?   

**Q:**  This may have been just a warning to him in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, because in the pronouncement of the verdict decision they said that because one of your family members is still in Amdo your property has not been confiscated. I have heard that. So if this was not true, then Reting's act was completely without any reason [Tib. དོན་དག་མེད་པ].   

**A:**  In Kheme's [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད] book he mentioned that it was done without reason and that he himself was too straightforward and honest and thus he could not please the authorities, so that is why it happened. Künsangtse said his family member could not satisfy Reting's needs from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Treasury because he said some things were also needed for the government too, so he [Reting] can't borrow them. So Reting got upset and used two small excuses of not taking a departure audience and not properly carrying outs some repairs at Phabonghka to give a huge pronouncement in the decision. [he threw him out of the government]. This is what Kheme Dzasa wrote.   

**Q:**  This was what Kheme Dzasa wrote. If this was true, then there was a reason.   

**A:**  Khenjung was among the servants.   

**Q:**  I think what Khenjung said was partially true, though it was not exactly like what he said. Anyway, Künsangtse [he is the same as Kheme Dzasa] was reluctant to go from Chamdo. This might be true.   

**A:**  Künsangtse and Ketsang were related.   

**Q:**  Regarding Künsangtse and Ketsang not getting along well, not only did this Khenjung mentioned this, but Gongma Rimpoche also said this saying that he heard this from Ketsang, but not like what Khenjung said. Khenjung said that the Chinese knew about the reincarnation and they suspected Künsangtse and they probably reported these to Lhasa. Reting Rimpoche told Tragyab [Tib. བྲག་རྒྱབ] Rimpoche that after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> resigned he received Ketsang Rimpoche's letters. Before he didn't receive many important letters.   

**A:**  Oh my, this is shocking. But how could <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> have such arrogance to stop them?   

**Q:**  The Kashag might have stopped them.   

**A:**  The Kashag was not allowed to do that. That was impossible because who can bear the responsibility concerning the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. It was not likely and I swear by the three jewels that I didn't know what was behind this. Moreover, I worked with Kungö Khenjung for more than 3-4 years and I swear I never heard even a word like this. Khenjung was very dedicated to the Tibetan Government and the Tibetan cause and he spoke straightforwardly to people without considering any reaction against him, but sometimes he exaggerated greatly and we become doubtful and we had to withdraw thinking it would be better to do that.   

**Q:**  Anyway, there was talk between Ketsang and Reting regarding Langdün. I also heard that Karmashar [Tib. སྐར་མ་ཤག] Deity gave the prophecy through the oracle saying, "The happy sun of the world will rise from the south." [Tib. འཛམ་གླིང་སྐྱིད་པའི་ཉི་མ་ལྷོ་ནས་ཤར] is that true?   

**A:**  Karmashar normally or very often gives certain signs of future events in Lhasa, but I've never heard this statement or him having said anything about other reincarnations.   

**Q:**  What really had happened with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> incident? What was the real inside story?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> thing was what people normally say regarding the remark he made. This hurt Reting badly and then they had this appeal from the Horpa [people], and they wanted to investigate. When they wanted to investigate, Khyungram refused to attend the Investigatory Committee and instead went to the monasteries to seek support. He also made an appeal which was supposed to have been corrected by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a>. So many things were said and finally it was said that it was not Bönshö but was Gajang Tempa. So as a result, even Gajang Tempa was punished along with Khyungram. Then they made the arrangement for the tents and Seynangsey [Tib. སྲས་ནང་སྲས] who was the Phogpön and a member of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> family was in charge of preparing the tents and putting up the placards for tents. Everything was prepared before and then we had the Kashag party ahead of schedule that year because of the events coming. During the Kashag Party [Tib. ཐུགས་སྤྲོ], the message came all of a sudden saying that the Dalai Lama should leave soon before the black [inauspicious] month. So we left suddenly but it was not that much of an emergency departure. The first night we spent in Dromtö [Tib. འབྲོམ་སྟོད] and the second night we spent in Jaritramo [Tib. ལྕགས་རི་ཁྲ་མོ]. I was among the entourage and in Jaritramo, just as we got settled, a horse messenger [Tib. རྟ་ཤད] arrived saying that the Dalai Lama is going to reach Gabshi Namoche [Tib. དགའ་བཞི་ན་མོ་ཆེ] and suddenly a trumpet was blown and they said this was the call for a meeting of the officials.   

**Q:**  How did they blow the gathering trumpet? Did they do that when a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> travels?   

**A:**  It was blown by the monks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] The monastery of the Dalai Lama located in the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Namgye Tratsang</a> because it was used to receive the Dalai Lama. So we went to the tent of the shape. The Drunyichemmo Ta Lama at the time was Dombor. The sawang said that Ta Lama and I are leaving right now. You people don't have to go in an official convoy but leave individually and all of you should arrive at Gabshi Namoche before the sunrise on such and such a day. he also said that the arrival date had been fixed. This was announced. Thereafter, there was no official convoy and also no arrangements of stopovers, etc. It was all done individually. So almost everyone had to run to see who got where first. [got there on time]. Those who had good horses went and those of us with not good horses could not keep up with the others. So we came a day after the others, but we reached Gabshi Namoche on time. Many other officials like Trekhang and Tresur [Tib. བཀྲས་ཟུར] did not even reach there until the Dalai Lama reached the Nagchu Shabden [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན] Monastery.   

**Q:**  Did those who were late get punished?   

**A:**  No, they took the wrong route and got lost in the darkness. When I reached there it was a little before sunrise. The Dalai Lama had already arrived, but the functions had not yet started. So I was okay and was there when they began the functions just before daylight. I was not there, but I heard that the arrival scarf was given by the shape with [light from a] kerosene pressure [Coleman] lamp when the Dalai Lama came in his palanquin.   

**Q:**  Were you a tsipön then?   

**A:**  I was a tsipa.   

**Q:**  Oh yes, this was the time of Reting.   

**A:**  I never heard that anyone was to come first and then someone second. They just arrived one after another.   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was almost put down, right?   

**A:**  I heard that during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> period they almost threw out <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a>, but it was proved that he didn't do the corrections for Khyungram's letter.   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> saw the letter, but didn't make the corrections.   

**A:**  Those two were very close relatives; they are kind of first cousins.   

**Q:**  What do you think was the best achievement of Reting Rimpoche other than finding the Dalai Lama and rebuilding of monasteries in the south?   

**A:**  The Samye repairs were very good, and others repairs were good. But besides that, I have nothing to say.   

**Q:**  What about the social benefit for the people.   

**A:**  I don't know. I can't remember off hand.   

**Q:**  What about Taktra. We know he did religious service. He carved large numbers of collected works of lamas whose writings were rare in Tibet. And he even completed the 13th Dalai Lama's work of carving the Kangyur at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> with its index. Then also he attempted to make a list of the xylographic blocks available in Central Tibet.   

**A:**  He also prepared and completed the inventory of the contents of the 13th the Dalai Lama's tomb Gelek Dönjo [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་འདོད་འཇོ].   

**Q:**  Besides this, from the political point of view, rather the economic and social point of view, what are the best contributions he made?   

**A:**  I cannot say off hand.   

**Q:**  How many years did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> remain in power?   

**A:**  It was the year my eldest son Künsang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] was born. I have a list I'll give you later. I have a detailed list I'll give you. Probably, he was the Regent for 5-6 years.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> had dismissed, as his first major change, Langchungwa as a shape.   

**A:**  [pause] Yes, he did. I wonder why?   

**Q:**  I heard that Langchungwa left Chamdo without getting a successor to replace him after 3 years of his term.   

**A:**  Whatever really happened, I cannot remember exactly why. [he doesn't accept this reason]. Langchungwa was appointed by the 13th Dalai Lama. After that, Yuthok went to Chamdo as a dzasa.   

**Q:**  At that time, were yet to become a tsipön?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  As we had talked before, the abbots of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> submitted three points to the Kashag when they wanted to get <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> out. One of the points said that Chamdo being an important area there should have been a shape. This might have made the members of the Kashag agree that one of them had to go there for three years. They might have discussed [previously] that they will rotate, but the others didn't go, so he [Langchungwa] got angry and returned.   

**A:**  First <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> was there. He was a Katsab. They thought to replace him with Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Lama, but he excused himself from that. Then they appointed Dzasa Surkhang Surpa and Lobsang Pandenla and they served as Joint Dzasa. After that Langchungwa went. Langchungwa, then Yuthok, then Ngabö.   

**Q:**  No. Lhalu was there.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was Langchungwa's replacement?   

**A:**  When Surkhang was appointed [Shape], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was there, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Tempa Jayan; Phünkang. [Reting appointed all but Surkhang; Langdün was a leftover from the 13th Dalai Lama's time]. Whether it was as Bönshö's substitute after his death or after Phünkang's demotion, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> or Lhalu was promoted.   

**Q:**  It may be that the replacement for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, and then after demoting Phünkang, Lhalu was promoted.   

**A:**  That's definite. Lhalu was Tsipön before and when Phünkang's trouble came then Lhalu and Chömpel Thubden were the two Investigating Committee members. They even called Phünkang Lhajam to the committee and asked her questions. I don't remember why, Phünkang had two troubles.   

**Q:**  The 2nd may be that Phünkang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was supposed to forward Reting's letter to the Tsenyi Trülku [Tib. མཚན་ཉིད་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] through the envelope of the Kashag.   

**A:**  No, no, no. I don't think that was it. When this bomb came, then a few days later the Reting trouble came. When the Kashag instructed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> at that time, they told us that Reting Labrang should be sealed. Normally Phünkang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> were the two families very close to Reting, so these two houses should also be sealed. There was no talk of any letter, etc. That day I don't remember whether it was during the Mönlam or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a>, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> were all there [at Reting] when we sealed the Reting property.   

**Q:**  It was at Tsongjö.   

**A:**  Is that so? Anyway, after Reting was sealed we discussed among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> and it was getting late and instead of going all together, we said we should divide up and some go to Phünkang and some to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a>. Ngabö said he is close to Sandu, so he can go there. So I went with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> to Phünkang.   

**Q:**  If Ngabö is close to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a>, how could he go to seal their property?   

**A:**  No, no. Since he knows them, he can talk with them so there won't be any trouble.   

**Q:**  Who went with Ngabö?   

**A:**  Probably Namseling. So the two junior tsipön went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> and the 4 senior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> went to Phünkang [he, Lukhangwa and the 2 drunyichemmo]. We made this division in Reting Labrang itself. Then we went to Phünkang house. When we reached there, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was not there. When they inquired where he was, they said he went to see some Lama, maybe Phurbujog Rimpoche or somebody. Shortly after that, he came wearing a Damotse [Ch. da mao zi] hat. Then we all saluted [Tib. ཕྱག་འབུལ] to him. And then we explained to him why we were there. Then we also told him, whichever room he wants to stay in he should choose and the rest of the rooms we were going to seal. There was one room with a raised platform and another small adjoining room, and he asked us to leave these two. We did that. Then the Phünkang people asked whether they can take out their food stores and keep them. Kündeling was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and the representative of the Shö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a> and Phala was the tsendrön, the representative of the Dalai Lama's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> gaa [Tib. རྩེ་འགག]. They took out the necessary stores, but the drungtsi didn't go down there. Then on the east side of Phünkang' house there was another room that was left for Phünkang's son and also for the lady Lhajam. All the other rooms were sealed up. This is what we did. In the end, Phünkang came out of the investigation without any fault as did Sandutsang. I was there.   

**Q:**  It seems to me that most appointments made to key posts by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, when we look at it with proper consideration, it seems money had played an important role. But when you look carefully, we see that loyalty was more important as the basis, and if you got money on top of that, that's good too. But it seems loyalty was the main thing. For example, although Surkhang bribed Taktra with a basketful of gold, Surkhang also lost an estate in the case with Shelkar Lingpa and Lhalu we all know, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> also had problems with Reting, etc. So it looks like Taktra was considering loyalty above money. What do you think?   

**A:**  I swear by the three jewels that I myself am wondering about this.   

**Q:**  When you look carefully, every important position was given to someone who had trouble with Reting. E.G. Lhalu, Surkhang, etc. Lhalu was even first appointed as Tsipön.   

**A:**  Wasn't Lhalu first appointed Tsipön by Reting?   

**Q:**  I don't think so. But Reting might have allowed him to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had arranged. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> might have appointed him Tsipön first and later as the shape.   

**A:**  Whether <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> arranged it or not, the approval was done by the Regent.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had helped him to get the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a>'s position and when Janglojen and Künphela escaped, Janglojen wrote that famous letter mentioning that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son, etc.   

**A:**  What kind of letter. I never heard of it. I swear by the three jewels.   

**Q:**  This was spread widely.   

**A:**  What kind of letter was that?   

**Q:**  It said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son, Lhalu Sey said his father was Shelkar Lingpa Depön and he became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> and we didn't even get permission to return to our homeland [Tib. ལུང་ཕྲུག་ལྷ་སྲས་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ཤེལ་མདར་བརྫུས་ནས་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གྱི་གོ་ཕུད། སྲས་རྣམ་པའི་གོ་མོང་ཐོབ། གུས་ཚོ་རང་ཡུལ་དུ་ལོག་འཐུས་ཞུས་པར་དོན་སྨིན་མ་སོན] Its impossible that you didn't know this. Almost all the government officers can recite it by heart.   

**A:**  I swear by the three jewels that I never heard it before today. And about Shelkar Lingpa, I only heard that after reading Künsangtse's book. I only had heard that Lhalu said that he is not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son but he is the son of Shelkar Lingpa so he got the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> status. What we heard was that Lhalu Lhajam went to Reting and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> and Lhalu got the senampa title and also became the gandrön. That was the Reting period. I was wondering why they did it. I never knew ans was wondering why they did it. I never knew about that petition until I read Künsangtse's book. Politics is dirty.   

**Q:**  Not only that, but they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> a song at the time, "If Lhalu is appointed as the shape, it will be scary. Instead of this, if you appoint <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> is strong." [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཞབས་པད་བསྐོས་ན། འ་ཙི་འ་མ་ཡོད་རེད། དེ་ལས་བསམ་ཕོ་བསྐོས་ན། སྤོམ་མདའ་ཧྲག་ཧྲག་ཡོད་རེད]   

**A:**  Yes, I read this in Künsangtse's book. In Lhasa small little songs used to come. They were sung by those collecting the water for the Mönlam. These type of songs were not sung by them, but in later years we heard some funny songs, but I thought they were made by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> to disgrace someone or other.   

**Q:**  Next important question is that I also heard that when Reting resigned there was some kind of document prepared by the Tsondu that he would resume that office in three years. Is there such a thing?   

**A:**  No. There was no such letter. I was in the Tsondu and I kept all the documents and I saw no such thing.   

**Q:**  If there was no formal letter, maybe there was a verbal agreement.   

**A:**  No such words were there, because I was there. Though I was not inside the room, I could hear everything. Reting said that according to the divination and mirror divination, he could no longer continue and he must resign. He insisted he must resign. Also he said he feels that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> is the most suitable to be Regent. That's all I heard. And these are in the minutes of the Tsondu. I was there. Later it was revealed that there was talk about 3 years, but there was nothing said at that time in the Tsondu.   

**Q:**  How did the Reting trouble come?   

**A:**  As far as I know, first the bomb came. [the bomb which exploded in drunyichemmo's Gyambumgang's [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] house.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there some talk about the butter sculpture festival (Tib. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ] The festival on the 15th of the first Tibetan month when butter sculptures were exhibited.">Jönga Chöpa</a> [བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ]) also? [meaning that they were supposed to kill Taktra on that night.]   

**A:**  No, that we came to know later. I didn't know of that at that time. As far as I was concerned I was preparing to go to the Jönga Chöpa. I had already put on the Gyaluche [Tib. རྒྱ་ལུ་ཆས] costume to go. There might have been internal talk, but we didn't know that.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go to the Regent's house?   

**A:**  No. We had to go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> only. From the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, when the Regent left, we had to follow him around. Then I received a message suddenly. I think the message had come from Shö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a> saying that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> should not come tonight as the Regent is not going. I was wondering why it was suddenly cancelled, but I went to see the Jönga Chöpa. I thought that if the Regent wasn't coming, how could the Kashag come. It was not possible for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> not to go for they had to read out the list of the butter sculptures. Later it was revealed out of documents that we confiscated from Reting Labrang that they were going to send someone to shoot the Regent that night. Not only that, they also revealed they were going to send someone to do an ambush at around Tshakur Linga [Tib. ཚ་ཁུར་གླིང་ག]. This was in the correspondence between Reting Rimpoche and Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས་བླ་མ], etc. They wanted to do this. Reting had written not to do this very strongly many times.   

**Q:**  Did Reting Rimpoche say not to do it?   

**A:**  He said very strongly that they shouldn't get involved in such activities. Not only this, he also gave some examples in his handwriting. If we get involved in this one day we may even have to go to the northern nomad area where there is not even a single human being living. And also you two [Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] and Nyungne] may even have to sit in the meditation in room the size of 4 arm-lengths square. Not only that, he also said that at this moment, as far as Reting Labrang is concerned, the stupa may be upside down, but the center of the stupa stays the same [Tib. མཆོད་རྟེན་མགོ་མཇུག་ལོག་ཀྱང། བང་རིམ་སྐེད་པར་གནས] (That means that though they have no power, they have good respect]. These he wrote many times to them. Later there was a letter from these two Lamas from Lhasa saying that if you don't agree to our suggestion, then we have no alternative but to resign from the service of Reting Labrang. For which Reting also said, it will be good if you two go around on a begging pilgrimage [Tib. ལྟོ་སྐོར་གནས་སྐོར]. Later, he changed his mind.   

**Q:**  Afterwards did Reting ever okay it?   

**A:**  He didn't say okay, but he said whatever you have to do, do very carefully. We may even have to go to the Indian border near Bhutan [Tib. ལྷོ་འབྲུག] or if not, if you have to go to the northern nomad land, then that girl may find difficulties because of the cold weather, etc. Finally he made his mind up that he wanted to cross to India from the Bhutan side. All these documents were exhibited. Reting himself sent many letters urging them not to do such things, such as assassinations. All were in his handwriting. This is definite. Most of them were written by Nyungne Lama and Khardo and most by Nyungne Lama. The letters they sent from Lhasa were in very nice handwriting. They kept all the drafts. Also they kept all the letters that Reting sent to them. They were all in his handwriting. They were on a yellow paper with green ink. So coming back to the point, the first is the bomb. This was supposed to have been given to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> from Doji Yuthok. We didn't know the bomb had come at that time. A few days later there was a poster [Tib. yik skyur] which was thrown inside the Phodrang Sarpa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ] of Taktra saying that there was an important letter to be given to the Regent from Doji Yuthok, however it was stopped by Ngawang Namgyel [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. That particular poster came to the drungtsi. We discussed this and Ngawang Namgyel told us that he had received one parcel. And then he said it is not good so we had to open it and see what it was. Then he was supposed to have opened it with his servant and it exploded, though we didn't know about that.   

