# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0215.12 : Tape 12  
##  : with Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 W. D. Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] was a very prominent aristocratic government official who held the rank of Tsipön. He is the author of "Tibet: A Political History." In this interview, he talks about the Reting and Taktra eras and about Lungshar's work and punishment, as well as about the exiling of Kujar and Janglocen and their escape to India.   

---  
### Tape 12  

---

**A:**  That is true. At that time, I had already joined the government service.   

**Q:**  There was talk that before His Holiness passed away he left instructions that Reting should become the Regent. Before his death he had visited Reting monastery and left instructions that Reting should succeed him as the Regent. Is this true?   

**A:**  It is true that he visited Reting since my late uncle was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> head. He went with His Holiness as his attendant. Later on, he told me that there was a juniper tree in Reting which was planted by His Holiness that was known as the "Sog Shing" [Tib. སྲོག་ཤིང] [life tree]. It has a very mystical connection with the person who plants it. From the tree's growth, one can foretell the well-being of its planter. Should the tree dry up or indicate any unhealthy growth, the planter is also bound to suffer the same fate. So when His Holiness was going to Reting, he cut this tree and put a certain mark on it. My late uncle told me that. However, I cannot vouch for it. In any case, His Holiness definitely visited Reting before he passed away, but I cannot tell you what instructions he left behind.   

**Q:**  When Reting ascended the throne, among the shapes there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Gendün Chödrag, and Sawang Nangchung right? Trekhang was not there. He was not yet a Sawang, right?   

**A:**  The Jigyab Khembo Lobsang Tenzin was there and I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> was also one of them. Trendong returned as the Doji of Kham and died after 2 years.   

**Q:**  Who were the Tsipön at that time?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, Chalo, and Shelkar Lingpa were the 3 Tsipön. Normally there were 3 Tsipön, but during this time there were 4 Tsipön.   

**Q:**  According to what I have heard, there were two conflicting roles for which the 'Kyichog Kündün' organization was supposedly organized. According to one version, it was supposed to be a political organization with 3 main aims. First, the object was to strive to find out the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama as soon as possible. Second, the object was to build a beautiful golden stupa to keep the remains of the 13th Dalai Lama, and finally it was to work for the betterment of the citizens of Tibet. The second version says that this organization was built with two goals in mind.   

**A:**  According to what I have heard, there was no talk about building a golden stupa. I heard that this organization was built to bring equality and standardize the process of granting promotions and the distribution of portfolios. They objected that even among the two officials- a monk and layman - the power was not equally divided and so on. However, this was only a pretense. The real purpose behind this move was that the organization was hoping to consolidate their existing power.   

**Q:**  What does equal distribution of power mean?   

**A:**  This means that in the existing system, certain persons were holding more than 2 important portfolios whereas there are many who did not hold even a single portfolio. So they wanted to reform this system. The people who started this organization were Tempa Jamyang, Menre, Janglocen, Gajang Tempa, Draktön, Tso Chungwa and Tsipa Kabten. Tempa Jamyang resigned later on. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was a member in the beginning. This is based on hearsay. No one knows for sure. However, this moment was popular for some time and many government officials joined them. I have seen the list of members. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>'s name was also included. We did not join this movement and took a neutral stand because we did not know actually what was going on. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Chemmo would tell us nothing, although we were supposed to be among his most trusted followers. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Trekhang and the Jigyab Khembo were also not going. We were ordered to stay back and not get involved in anything. Once Trekhang went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> where he had some work. He was then the Tseja. While coming back, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was with him. They came quite late at night and when they reached the gate at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>, suddenly Lungshar was taken towards the outer gate. Sawamgchemmo panicked. He did not know what was going on. He saw two people in front of Lungshar's horse and two behind and they moved off. It was a precautionary move, fearing that some hired thugs might try to kill him. But my uncle did not know this and he was really nervous. He said that there were lot of unhealthy rumors and this move confirmed them. It was definitely not a good sign. He asked me to go and report these things to Sawang Trimön. In the evening I went and as instructed reported to Trimön, but he did not show any sign of interest or urgency. He told me to stay and spend the night at his house. The next day when I woke up, Trimön had risen very early and had gone to do circumambulation. I got up and as I opened the door, I saw a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> leaving. I wondered from where he had appeared. As I closed the door again, I saw two Khambas leaving. Now I thought there was definitely something afoot. Trimön would not say anything. So I went back and reported what I had seen to my uncle Trekhang. Day by day things were becoming clearer. Then a meeting was to be arranged and everyone was told to be present. Those who did not attend, it was said, would forfeit their posts and portfolios. This sort of talk was circulating among the various levels of the government officials. For us, it was crucial to project a neutral position. After a few days, we heard that Karchung and Menre had gone to the Kashag and had decided to kill Trimön. Karchung was a relative of Trimön and lived on Trimön's estate. When I heard these rumors, I went at once to Trimön's house at around 8 in the morning. When I enquired where Trimön had gone, they said he had left for the Kashag. I said if he had gone to Kashag why would he have taken so many servants. I also told him that all the horses were missing. He replied, "No, he had gone to the Kashag at Norbulinga." Since His Holiness death, no Kashag meeting had been held in Norbulinga so I wondered why? What he had told me did not make any sense. I thought what a liar this fellow is. Incidentally, he was my servant's father and he was Trimön's manager. A servant came to see me off. On the way, I asked him where my uncle had gone? He said that they were told that Trimön was leaving for Norbulinga. I asked him who had accompanied him. He told me the names. He also told me that Trimön had put on his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གའུ] 1. A small box/pendant for keeping religious objects. 2. A small jewelery box worn by women as a necklace. 3 A small box worn on the hair of lay officials.">gao</a> and also taken his drinking cup's covering sheath.   

**Q:**  If he took his cup's covering sheath what does it mean?   

**A:**  Only if you are going on a long journey would you take the cup cover. When the servant told me these details I became very suspicious. I had come to report to him about the plot to kill him, but I had missed him. Later on I was told that he had gone straight to Reting to report these matters. He also reported that he would be leaving for Drepung. He stopped for a short time in Drepung and then continued on to Gemphel. He instructed most of his servants to return back from Drepung. Taking only a few servants he went to Gemphel where he had already made arrangements. All these were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s doing.   

**Q:**  Was it truly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s doing? Wasn't Shugola involved?   

**A:**  No. Shugola was one of us. He did not know anything. He used to live on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s estate. Karchung also lived within Trimön's estate. These were my suspicions. Later on, the same day, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was arrested.   

**Q:**  Was it on the same day?   

**A:**  Yes. It was on the same day. Messengers came to report to the Kashag that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was missing.   

**Q:**  Who was the messenger?   

**A:**  Karchung, Menre and Janglocen were among the messengers.   

**Q:**  Did they go to beat up <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. I was told that they went to beat up <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>. I wonder how Karchung could do such a thing. He was a relative. In fact, he was supposed to grab Trimön's hair and had come wearing a leather glove so that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གའུ] 1. A small box/pendant for keeping religious objects. 2. A small jewelery box worn by women as a necklace. 3 A small box worn on the hair of lay officials.">gao</a> in official's hair would not cut his hand. That is what I heard. I do not know if it is true or not. It was the same day that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was arrested.   

**Q:**  Actually, at that time what post did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> hold? Wasn't he the supervisor for making the Golden Stupa in which His Holiness the 13 Dalai Lama's remains were to be kept?   

**A:**  No. He was the senior Tsipön. Next to him in rank was Khrogawo, followed by Chalo. Later on, Shelling joined them. Khrogawo was in charge of making the stupa. He was very good in writing.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  No, definitely not. Khrogawo was the person in charge of this project. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> reported everything that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> had told him. The Regent at once summoned Kapshöba and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>. When the Regent scolded and removed Lungshar's hair-knot, he nearly ran off. Then a magic mantra was also found in his shoes and he tried to eat it and so on. All these are rumors and speculations and hearsay. We have not witnessed them with our eyes. Then they were both interrogated. When they were arrested, Trekhang was the Tseja. He told me that when Lungshar and Kapshöba were arrested, they had lots of holy amulets on.   

**Q:**  Were all their amulets stripped off?   

**A:**  Yes. They were stripped of all their holy amulets. There was a basin full of them. They were arrested and a commission was formed to investigate their crimes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> told me these details. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> stayed for a week in Drepung. He went to Chöndzela's room, changed his clothes and left immediately for Gemphel.   

**Q:**  There is talk that in Drepung he met the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> and that the Laji came to see him and offered his support.   

**A:**  I have not heard anything like that. I only heard that in Drepung he went Chöndze's room which was situated on the top floor of Tsetang Khamtsen, changed his dress, left with two servants for Gemphel where some of his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག] A category of young tough guys that Khamba traders and rich households retained for protection, especially when going on trading trips, but in the end for anything the &quot;boss&quot; needed done. They lived and ate with the family and were very close with them, almost like relatives.">aptru</a> had already arrived. They served and looked after him. He lived there quietly. Then on the same day or the day after, Janglocen, Menre, Draktön and Karchung were all arrested.   

**Q:**  I believe there were two agreements made, an inner agreement and an outer one. Besides <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, did anyone else see the inner document?   

**A:**  There was no talk about anyone having seen the inner agreement. There was something called the Black Book. Of course everyone has seen the outer agreement.   

**Q:**  Of course everyone has not only seen it, but it had been stamped officially.   

**A:**  The document contained all the inner details. Tsidrung Phepo's [Tib. བལ་པོ] name was included. In the document it was agreed that once they come into power, Phepo would become the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> would become the Prime Minister. Of course, this is only hearsay. I have not seen the documents. Phepo (unclear) was residing as a '<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> Shöpa' ???? was caught forging the seal of the shape and was demoted to an ordinary tsipa.   

**Q:**  Did he make a duplicate seal?   

**A:**  Yes, the ???? 'Tsangchab' has to forward all the documents to be formally put under seal. Among the papers, he had slipped in a document which would exempt him from paying certain taxes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was the Secretary. When Bönshö was stamping the documents he noticed this and when he placed it aside, Phepo tried to snatch it away. As they were struggling, each tried to get possession of the document. The shapes heard the commotion and inquired what was happening? After finding out the truth, Phepo was at once demoted from his post. Therefore he became just an ordinary tsipa.   

**Q:**  If he had handled the situation coolly, maybe <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> might have let it pass?   

**A:**  No. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> would not drop the case. Once the document reached him, it became his responsibility.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't it have been all right to drop the matter if it had not been stamped?   

**A:**  That is true. Phepola had this personal problem, a grudge which he nursed from that time onward.   

**Q:**  A grudge against the Kashag and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> who was the kalön then?   

**A:**  Yes, that is how it was. Later on, the verdict was swiftly passed. When Ta Lama gave a lecture on Gegen Wöchong he discussed these matters. I heard a book was also published.   

**Q:**  I am sure Ta Lama must be telling the truth, but there are certain statements which are hard to believe. For instance, he says that when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s eyes were gouged and hot oil was poured in the socket, Ta Lama says that he could smell the stench of burned flesh up in the office. The office was situated way up in the Potala, so it is almost impossible for the smell to reach there unless a very strong wind was blowing towards it.   

**A:**  That is true. I think he just mentioned the subject. I have not read the book and neither have I seen it.   

**Q:**  At that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> stayed only for a week, I think?   

**A:**  He did not stay longer than a week and then he left.   

**Q:**  According to what I heard, when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> were on trial, their hair was disheveled and Lungshar was dressed in a prison uniform whereas Kapshöba was not?   

**A:**  When the order to blind <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was confirmed, he was taken to Shöl. While he was staying in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a>, I do not know whether he was made to wear prison dress.   

**Q:**  At the time of the trial, who all were in the gashib.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was there. There was another one known as Horshib Shedel and I think the Drunyichemmo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> was present too.   

**Q:**  Are you sure that Shedel was there?   

**A:**  Yes, it was Shedel. However, it was not Shedel the Secretary to the Auditor, but it was Horshib Shedel.???? Then Tempa Jamyang was also among them. I do not know exactly how he came to be included. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཞིབ] A government investigation committee.">gashib</a> was led by Shedel. This is definitely certain. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was not a monk official. Tempa Jamyang was demoted from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> to a letsenpa.   

**Q:**  Why was Tempa Jamyang demoted?   

**A:**  When the eastern section of the Potala was being renovated, he was the person in charge of the laborers. The reconstruction work was not done well. Near the Namgyeri, where the Cham dance ritual is performed, the entrance gate was built rather unevenly. An inquiry was made and he was among those who were found responsible for this poor workmanship. Parkhang was the overall official in charge of this team. At that time, the 13th Dalai Lama was alive. Parkhang was the representative of the Kashag. He was demoted to Khenche. Among the inquiry committee, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> and Khrogawo were Tsipön. I have a list of the committee members somewhere. I shall let you know later on. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was also one of them and he told me that he will most probably be reborn as a blind person because he was among those who suggested that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> should be blinded.   

**Q:**  Was this idea to blind <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> included in the plan that was submitted?   

**A:**  Yes, I think it was in the plan.   

**Q:**  Was it publicized?   

**A:**  No. No. It was only in the plan.   

**Q:**  According to what I heard, when the plan was formulated, it was mentioned that his life should be forfeited?   

**A:**  No. There was no talk about taking his life. Initially, when the plan was discussed, it was suggested that he should not be killed because his negative spirit might harm the process of finding the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama and also his evil spirit might harm the life of the young Dalai Lama when he is born.   

**Q:**  Oh! I see. Maybe some people on hearing about his imprisonment presumed that he would be killed and therefore the rumors about his execution started.   

**A:**  No. Although I was not on the Committee and what I have heard is hearsay, I am definite that there was no talk about killing him. In fact, everyone was very careful and concerned that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> should not die in prison. There was also talk that a doctor was sent to the prison to look after him. The reason why everyone did not want to kill him is not because they loved him, but it was because if he should die before the Dalai Lama's incarnation was found, he might pray negatively and as a result there might be mistakes in selecting the proper reincarnation. This might prove to be a national disaster. There was no talk at all about killing him because the late 13th Dalai Lama had issued a proclamation that no prisoner's lives should be taken. Also, when the religious last rites were being performed for the late Dalai Lama, there was no talk whatsoever about executing Lungshar.   

**Q:**  After receiving the suggestions, a decision was made. Who put the stamp of approval? Was it Reting or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a>?   

**A:**  Most probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> put his seal on the order. It is said that since Reting was a monk, he refused to put his seal on the order. However, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> family had never liked Reting. I do not know the personal reasons they had for their animosity. But I have definitely heard that it was Langdün and not Reting who formally put his seal on the order to blind Lungshar.   

**Q:**  What were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s contributions to the government?   

**A:**  He was definitely a capable and intelligent man. I have mentioned this in my book. My personal opinion is that since he had been to England and other foreign countries, he had seen how their governments functioned. Therefore, maybe he was trying to bring about new changes in our country; to reform the many outdated conceptions. I do not think he was after personal gain, but rather he was thinking about bringing a revolutionary change. In most of the cases, those who try to bring about a revolutionary change always meet obstacles and resistance. The risk of sustaining personal loss of power, position, property and life is always great. That is what I think. That is my personal view. The reason why I think like this is based on various documents I have seen at the Tsikhang office. At that time, he was one of the Tsipön. During the lay official's sports competition, there is horse racing, archery and shooting. These competitions have no use during a war so <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> suggested that these lay officers should be taught how to ride motorcycles and to shoot well. These were suggested in a plan. I do not know if it was only Lungshar who suggested this plan, because suggestions had to go through all the four Tsipön. In the plan, it was suggested that all the lay officers should be taught how to shoot in different positions like lying prone, standing and crouching. They should also be trained to operate the cannons and regular tests should be held. These suggestions were ordered to be postponed for sometime by the 13th Dalai Lama. He was thinking about other similar reforms. We also had the same ideas. Horsemanship and archery skills are good, no doubt, and we could compete favorably in these skills with anyone, but it does not help much in a war. Lungshar thought that the Depön must pass through the lay officials ranks and therefore they had no training at all about warfare. In ancient times, horsemanship, archery and firing from horseback were useful, but nowadays these skills were useless. Lunghsar had suggested these should be changed. He had also formulated and forwarded a special revenue collection to meet the necessary incomes for improving the standards of the military development. I think he was a very far-sighted man.   

**Q:**  The newly formulated revenue collection program (babshi) was hailed as a very important and useful contribution by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, but do you really think it was useful and worthwhile? Didn't it cause a lot of problems for a lot of people? For example, the main reason why the Panchen Rimpoche ran off was due to this new revenue tax, right?   

**A:**  We cannot say that this new revenue tax was good or bad, but supposing a new army was formed then it is only natural that the government should pay them wages. Previously all the payments to the soldiers were made by collecting taxes on lands and farms. There has never been a custom of collecting cash in currency to be paid to the soldiers. We have always been collecting taxes on land and farms. Therefore, it was only natural that this new revenue should be levied from those who have lands and property. You cannot tax someone who does not have any property can you? Now all the upper class citizens like the aristocrats, the rich labrangs and monasteries with properties like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] The name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families.">Samdru Phodrang</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, Phala, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> were all complaining and grumbling since this new revenue would affect them most. All of them were worried and apprehensive. Some of them were saying it was unfair and so on.   

**Q:**  Was it true that Lhalu who comparatively had only a small amount of land, was very heavily taxed?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the idea. Everyone panicked when Lhalu's Phembo Changchab estate was heavily taxed. After that, it was better to submit and pay the taxes. Later all the properties in Khangsar Nyimön were heavily taxed. That was what I heard from other people.   

**Q:**  Was this new revenue levied on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, I think so.   

**Q:**  If <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> had this tax levied on it, later on didn't he [Lungshar] have to depend on their support! How was this done?   

**A:**  I have nothing to say about this.   

**Q:**  When he went to England to teach students, there was a talk that although he held the portfolio of a Tsipön, internally, in the power structure, he was equal to a shape.   

**A:**  No. No. he was a Tsipön. I have seen many documents about his mission. There were no instructions giving him a special post. Since he was among the senior Tsipön, he would initiate most of the moves. The reason why he was selected to go to England was because he was very intelligent and capable. But this does not denote any special significance or any special power conferred upon him, because such matters are always carried out by the Tsikhang office. There were four Tsipön and my grandfather was one of them.   

**Q:**  Was there any special favor conferred on them?   

**A:**  No, no special favor was granted them.   

**Q:**  Did he go to any other countries besides England?   

**A:**  No, he did not go. There is no talk of him visiting any other place. I have seen things from Prime Minister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>. I have seen some letters in the Tsikhang office. The students had been admitted in a school known as Rugby. From the school, regular reports were received stating their progress and also mentioning each student's preferences like sports, football and so on. All these reports were received by Prime Minister Shatra, in Simla. Shatra had sent all these details to the Tsikhang office. Therefore, going through these documents, I have not come across anything which states that he had visited any other country besides England. Neither did I see any indications that he had been instructed to carry out any other mission other than getting these students admitted into school. I think he must have stayed for a few months in England.   

**Q:**  Was there any outer, inner and secret matter involved?   

**A:**  I doubt if there was any outer, inner, and secret missions involved. I have not noticed any. But in case there was some inner secrets involved, than it would be very difficult to detect these. It is like when I was sent by Kujar on my secret mission to Kham. From what I have seen, I have not detected any such matter. It is just that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was selected otherwise. Tashi Palkar was equally capable and eloquent.   

**Q:**  At that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had yet to become famous right?   

**A:**  Yes, he had yet to become famous. After returning from England, his outlook was broadened and therefore he submitted many suggestions.   

**Q:**  You must have heard about this incident when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s wife was about to give birth to a child and someone said that if the child is delivered in England it will be born like a European with blond hair and blue eyes. She was very much worried and upset and said, if I give birth to a child with blond hair and blue eyes, how can I show him to the people and what will they say? So she was quickly sent to Bombay and there also she was not very confident so she went up to Darjeeling and Lhalu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was born there.   

**A:**  I heard that Lhalu was born in London.   

**Q:**  I have been told that Lhalu was born in Darjeeling. This seems quite definite.   

**A:**  I have no idea about this, but normally there is the saying that if a child is born in a foreign country, he becomes the citizen of that country.   

**Q:**  Yes, most probably they must have misunderstood this due to communication problems. There is a talk that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> visited Germany and France which made the British suspicious. They censored all his correspondence.   

**A:**  Unless the Russians or the Chinese were suspected of [unfinished]   

**Q:**  It was before II World War started. I think he went to Germany and Russia. I have asked Changchubla and he was sure that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had visited these places. I think it was also mentioned in the British White Paper?   

**A:**  I have no idea about it at all. Among the students, there was one known as Gokar. He was a student of military warfare. Just before the war ended, he had gone to Germany after finishing his training. He was given the rank of Major in the British Army.   

**Q:**  Did the British really give him a rank?   

**A:**  Yes, he was given a rank. Later when he returned, he was given a military welcome with soldiers lining up at Gyantse. He was presented with a horse. When he reached <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, he had no formal Tibetan military rank, but later on he was given a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a>'s rank - I think? From then onwards, I have seen him around His Holiness entourage, riding the Tikichak horse which he had been given in Gyantse and armed with a sword. The military officer would escort the Dalai Lama's entourage armed with a sword. Gorkar was very young at that time and wore a smart dress. He could be seen around the entourage. However, the most popular and famous young officer was Tsarong.   

**Q:**  It was during the previous Dalai Lama reign. Didn't Gokar get any promotion?   

**A:**  He died very early. I think he lived for a year or two after returning to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did he die before the Tsarong scandal arose?   

**A:**  Yes, he died before this scandal. I heard he had a very good knowledge about military operations, but this knowledge could not be made use of. I remember him as a tall, smartly dressed officer moving around the Dalai Lama throne. This was a privilege granted to the rupön. I saw him taking part in the archery, firing on horseback, spearing and so on competition. Later on, I did not see him much. I heard he was not keeping well. He died within two years.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was arrested and put in a prison at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>, people like Janglocen and his accomplices were sent into exile, was not it?   

**A:**  Yes, there were banished.   

**Q:**  Did Janglocen go with Kujar to India?   

**A:**  Yes. At first they were sent somewhere in the south [of Tibet], but later when their punishment was decided, I do not know where they were sent.   

**Q:**  I heard Janglocen was sent to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> in Kongpo and Kujar was sent to Chamnag. They kept in touch and after visiting each other frequently, escaped together to Kalimpong. At that time, where were the others sent?   

**A:**  I really do not know where the others were sent. I saw Draktön and Phepola much later.   

**Q:**  What were they doing?   

**A:**  They were serving the government as a "new official" (Tib. ཤབསར [ཞབས་གསར]).   

**Q:**  Was it during <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s reign?   

**A:**  No, it was during Reting's regency. Menre was also serving as a "new official". He was a tall man. Daktonla was good in calligraphy. He was also a new official.   

**Q:**  What happened to Chapa?   

**A:**  I wonder what happened to him?   

**Q:**  Wasn't Chapa handed over to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>?   

**A:**  That is correct. After being handed over to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>, he was sent to Orong which was under Shatra's estate. Shatra was one of the Tsipön whose name I could not remember earlier.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> become the Dzongpön of Orong?   

**A:**  No, after his term as Tsipön, he was sent to Po Tödzong by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> because he had some misunderstanding with him. It was during the 13th Dalai Lama reign.   

**Q:**  After returning from Po, he was made a shape but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> did not live long to enjoy being a shape.   

**A:**  Was he not a Tsipön?   

**Q:**  Did he go away without being dismissed or relieved by the government?   

**A:**  He was a Tsipön before.   

**Q:**  Was he there when His Holiness passed away?   

**A:**  No, he was not there at that time. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> was in Po Tödzong.   

**Q:**  I think he was coming up from Po Tödzong. He told me that he met Kujar at Chamnag. I remember that during Reting's time he was appointed as a shape for the first time.   

**A:**  He did not live long after returning. Before he could officially receive his post as an acting shape, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> passed away.   

**Q:**  Did you meet Kujar and Janglocen later on in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, I met them.   

**Q:**  Then what was the news about them?   

**A:**  I met Janglocen in 1946. I had come for a pilgrimage. He made a few jokes and light conversation. He did not refer to his past sufferings and failures. Later in 1948, I went to Beijing. It was during the period when we went to USA and so on. I met Kujar in Nanjing. On this occasion he talked a lot about how he had been unfairly treated in spite of the fact that he had served the government sincerely. He indicated that he was very unhappy with the whole set up. His malice was mostly directed against Reting which I found quite strange. While in Nanjing we invited each other for lunches and dinner. So we had a good talk. He seemed very depressed.   

**Q:**  Wasn't Kujar and his associates blamed mainly for not informing the Kashag about how critically ill the 13th Dalai Lama was? Besides that, were there any other allegations against them?   

**A:**  There were some other accusations concerning the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment. When this new organization was formed, it was basically meant for the sons of the nobility only. However, some of them were exempted from joining this institution as a personal favor, while others had paid huge sums of money to overlook the fact that instead of their son, some ordinary citizens were allowed to impersonate them. These discrepancies were brought up as charges against Kujar when they were put on trial.   

**Q:**  During the inquiry   

**A:**  After the inquiry in the Tsondu, an order was issued.   

**Q:**  There was no specific inquiry committee formed?   

**A:**  I doubt it. I heard it was decided in the Tsondu.   

**Q:**  Was there a definite and clear-cut statement which said that "you did this, therefore you are punished?"   

**A:**  I do not think they were accused of any specific or precise crimes. It was more of a vague and collective accusation. Kujar himself told me that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had always been against him. He had also berated Kujar's father too.   

**Q:**  Where was Kujar's father?   

**A:**  I think he was in Lhasa. He was also arrested with his son Kujar and imprisoned. He was banished with Kujar on the same day. Kujar's father was handed over to Nyemo Tejong in Nyemo and Kujar was sent to Chamnag. Tashi Thöndrub was in Dakpo Rabden Gön. At that time I was serving <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> as acting gadrung. Trimön had gone to Tsari. On the way, we stopped at the monastery known as Ganden Rabden for a day. It was a beautiful monastery. Tashi Thöndrub came to see Trimön. I do not know what talks they had.   

**Q:**  Had he become a monk?   

**A:**  No, he had not become a monk. He was wearing a layman's dress and he seemed quite happy.   

**Q:**  At that period, Reting was already enthroned and the Guomindang had sent their representatives to pay last respect to the deceased Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama died in the year of the Bird. The Guomindang representatives came in the 6th or 7th month in the year of the Dog. I remember this occasion clearly because the late Trekhang was promoted from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> to a Sawang. When Trekhang went to receive his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གསར་མཇལ] 1. The required ceremony that was done when an official got a promotion. It involved going for an audience with the Dalai Lama or Regent. 2. The ceremony when a person first entered Tibetan government service.">sarjel</a> audience, the Guomindang delegation arrived. There was a lot of talk about them.   

