#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0215.10 : Tape 10  
##  : with Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New York City, New York, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and English and translated entirely into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 W. D. Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] was a very prominent aristocratic government official who held the rank of Tsipön. He is the author of "Tibet: A Political History." In this interview, he speaks about the Lhundrup Dzong incident and gives details about the loan exemption edict issued by the Tsondu after the people in Se and Chushul petitioned them. The subject also tells about Abo Raga's printing of many copies of the translation of the "Three Principles of the People," and about Gendün Chömpel's arrest. He also talks about the Tibetan Government sending a mission to congratulate the allies' victory in WWII, and how the British told the Tibetans that they should not attend the Chinese national assembly meeting, but how the Chinese official Sheng acted tactfully pretending to be a Buddhist and duped the Tibetans. The subject also talks about the demotion of Kapshöba by Taktra and also about the expulsion of the Chinese from Tibet. Shakabpa also explains the plan to go to Hong Kong to talk with the Chinese Communists and how the Tibetan Government received a letter from Gyalo Thondup's father-in-law saying the delegates should go to Hong Kong. The subject also talks about his official trip to America. He discusses how some American lawyers suggested that the Tibet should petition the U.N. and how he reported this to the Tibetan Government, but received a negative reply.   

---  
### Tape 10  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0215_10/H_0215_10.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I don't have much to tell you because I have a poor memory and I don't have that much experience. But I am happy to tell you whatever I know.   

**Q:**  Thank you. I heard two things regarding Lhundrup Dzong. Some say that after the government passed the law regarding the exemption of the loans, the monks couldn't tolerate it. Some others say that the people in Phenpo had just made a petition to the government and didn't want to pay the monks until the petition was settled. I want to know exactly what happened.   

**A:**  I remember this. There was discussion in the Tsondu about the miser in Se [Tib. ཟས] and Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] and Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] submitting a petition regarding charging interest upon interest, and about lenders also taking animals for the loans. So the Tsondu said that we should make a payment arrangement [Tib. རྒྱས་དཔྱད] for the old loans which were a certain number of years old, saying that they would be exempted from having to pay both the principal and the interest. For some of the loans taken a certain number of years ago, the interest would be exempted, but the principal should be paid according to payment arrangement. The loans taken in the past 1-2 years should be paid with one tenth of the interest which was for the grain that had dried up after it was stored [Tib. སྐམ་ཆ་བཅུ་ཟུར]. It was said that the lenders were not allowed to take the house and land for the [unpaid] loans. This edict was issued in all places and this caused the trouble in Lhundrup Dzong.   

**Q:**  So when the monks came, the miser said that they don't want to pay the loans, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and the Lhundrup Dzong supported the miser. This was clear.   

**Q:**  When was the first investigation called? Probably, the trouble occurred in the 11th Tibetan month, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  Was the first investigation started before the New Year?   

**A:**  Yes. It was before the New Year when the Investigatory Committee of 4 drungtsi together [Tib. བཞི་སྦྲེལ] was appointed.   

**Q:**  Before the four joint drungtsi, wasn't there a joint committee of 2 drungtsi?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't. The trouble started to become bigger on the 29th of the 12th Tibetan month at the Tsegutor. On that day, it was heard that the monks were holding meetings and so on. Since then, the joint meeting was held with the 8 drungtsi and in addition to them, there were Sambo and Dombor.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it later when they appointed Sambo?   

**A:**  Yes, that was later on. At the beginning, the case was handed over to two drungtsi-drunyichemmo Lheding and me. However, we did not accept that and then it was handed over to the 4 joint drungtsi. At that time, the drungtsi sent an edict calling on them [monks] to make a report, but they didn't come. And then we heard about them on the 29th. Two of us didn't accept the case because the problem was related to Sera. Then the 4 joint drungtsi were appointed, but Chömpel Thubden was involved in the case so the four joint drungtsi were: drunyichemmo Lheding, Ta Lama, Kapshöba and me.   

**Q:**  At that time, did all of the drungtsi come except Chömpel Thubden?   

**A:**  Yes, probably Gyambumgang hadn't become drunyichemmo by then.   

**Q:**  Lukhangwa was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Ngabö was there?   

**A:**  I am not sure about that.   

**Q:**  Was Lhalu there or not?   

**A:**  I don't remember clearly.   

**Q:**  After the joint drungtsi meeting was held, did you immediately call the monks?   

**A:**  Yes. We sent the edict right away to the monastery and called the grain stewards [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] of the Sera Jey and Ngagpa Colleges to come down, but they didn't come.   

**Q:**  How many days passed after you sent the edict until the Tsegutor took place?   

**A:**  Probably 3-4 days had passed.   

**Q:**  Did you interview Chömpel Thubden also?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. At that time, both of the parties were yet to be interviewed. Chömpel Thubden submitted a written statement. Otherwise, we didn't interview him.   

**Q:**  What was written in his statement?   

**A:**  It was written that the monks didn't listen to the miser and wanted them to pay the loans. When the Dzongpön called the grain stewards and treated them strictly [Tib. ནན་པོ], they started verbally fighting and then the monks beat up the Dzongpön. I don't remember the content in detail.   

**Q:**  You heard about that on the 29th right?   

**A:**  Yes. When we heard that, it was the time when Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] was going to invite the Dalai Lama to the Mönlam Festival. Then it was said that the Sera Jey and Ngagpa College's monks won't come to get their seating arrangement for the Mönlam. Probably, they didn't come at the right time. After that, probably the Shö gaa gave a strict order to the Shengo and the Simkhang Depa and the abbots of Sera Monastery saying that it is not all right if the monks didn't come to get their seats because the Dalai Lama was going to attend the Mönlam. Later, they [the monks] didn't come to get their seating arrangement, but they attended the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  According to the British documents, it was said that probably the Jigyab Khembo met with the Kashag until 9.30 p.m. After that, the Khamba traders in Lhasa mediated between the government and the monastery and the government said [to the monks] don't do anything now. We will consider this issue after the Mönlam and Tsongjö festivals.   

**A:**  I never heard this. But at that time it was kind of decided not to investigate the case until the Mönlam was over. This was decided on the 29th, the Tsegutor rite's day.   

**Q:**  I also heard that the monks said that they didn't want the drungtsi to investigate the matter because the drunyichemmo was involved in the case. They wanted the Regent and the Kashag to investigate the matter. Is that the case?   

**A:**  I have never heard this.   

**Q:**  Tsongjö was over in April, and nothing happened for the months May and June, and the monks were saying why didn't they settle the matter. Probably, the drunyichemmo hated the monks. We also heard that some representatives from the monks said that we just tried to do something to get supplies for the monastery's rites, so they might not be going to do anything to us. When did the investigation first take place?   

**A:**  I don't remember the dates, probably it was after the Tsongjö. The investigation was done in the Shöl Printing House [Tib. ཞོལ་པར་ཁང]. Sambo and Dombor were there in addition to the drungtsi, but I never heard about this at the meetings. There might have been such talks after the meeting was over.   

**Q:**  At that time I heard that the government summoned soldiers from Gyantse and other places thinking [they might be needed] in case something happened. I also heard that the monks were told to hand over the ringleaders [Tib. གཏེ་པོ], but the monks refused to do that.   

**A:**  At the beginning, when we called the grain stewards, they said, "Please allow us to send the monastic officials [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] and not the grain stewards." Later, the time was delayed because of the ceremonies. After that, when we started the investigation, the monastic officials came and we told them that it would not be okay for the monastic officials to come. The grain stewards who went to the site [to collect the loans] should come. I swear by the three jewels that I have never heard about the government summoning troops.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that at the beginning the committee asked the miser of Phenpo and the miser said that in Sera monastery, they were gathering in their monks who were then scattered at places long distances away, and that furthermore, they didn't send the grain stewards to the investigating committee. So the committee knew that the abbots of Jey and Ngagpa had sent orders to bring back all their monks and they decided to dismiss the abbots of Jey and Ngagpa. However, the abbot of Jey didn't come and he just sent his yellow monk's robe [Tib. ཆོས་གོས]. The Ngagpa Khembo resigned.   

**A:**  This talk about the abbots was after the investigation started. They did that to the abbots because the monks didn't come to get their seats (seating position) for the Mönlam Seating event (Tib. ཏྲེལཛིན).   

**Q:**  As far as the government was concerned, was it thought that if there was no abbot, the trouble would become less.   

**A:**  I don't know what their thinking was.   

**Q:**  Who decided to tell the abbots to resign? Was it the Shö gaa or the Kashag or the committee?   

**A:**  The resignation of the abbots was because of the matter of getting the seats for the Mönlam. The drungtsi didn't discuss this. This was done exclusively by the Yigtsang. Probably the cause of the resignation of the abbots was the Mönlam seat incident. Before the abbots resigned, the Jey Khembo had already run away and we received the report about that. The Ngagpa Khembo came on time. The 8 drungtsi didn't have anything to do with this matter.   

**Q:**  At that time, the investigation was going on, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the investigation was going on.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, did the monks say that we don't want to hand over the ringleaders?   

**A:**  Yes. In the beginning, they said in a tactful manner, "Please allow us not to hand over the ringleaders and we will accept whatever kind of punishment and fine you give." But we told them that it would not be okay if you don't hand over the ringleaders. They then accepted to send the ringleaders and went back from the committee meeting. But the Yigtsang was dealing with them independently regarding the Mönlam seating problem. Probably, the Ngagpa monks came [to the seating event] and didn't do much. But Jey College did some more powerful things.   

**Q:**  When did you interrogate the Phenpo miser?   

**A:**  After the investigation started, we called the miser and the estate managers and the ringleaders, when we needed to call them.   

**Q:**  I also heard that the monks of Jey and Ngagpa requested to have a prostration homage [Tib. ཕྱག་འཚལ་མཇལ་ཁ] on the 18th of June to the Dalai Lama in Norbulinga.   

**A:**  It wasn't like that at all. I have never heard this. [laughter]   

**Q:**  This was a matter about Reting and Taktra not getting along well. What I heard was that at the end of 1942, a Tsondu was held. I am not sure whether it was a Tsondu gyendzom or the Tsondu hragdu gyepa one or just the drungtsi. Anyway, the Tsondu requested Taktra to remain as Regent until the Dalai Lama takes the temporal and the political power.   

**A:**  At that time, I was among the drungtsi, but I have never heard this.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were yet to become a tsipön. You became the tsipön in between the summer and autumn of 1943.   

**A:**  At the end of 1942. When did the Sera disturbance occur?   

**Q:**  That was in 1944. In 1942, the above mentioned meeting was held.   

**A:**  I never heard about that. That was after Reting resigned, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. It was 1-2 years after Reting resigned.   

**A:**  At that time, if they had held such meeting, I wouldn't know because I was just a tsipa.   

**Q:**  Do you think it is possible for this to have happened?   

**A:**  Normally, if they didn't have a major matter, they would not hold the Tsondu gyendzom at all. They would not hold the Tsondu hragdu gyepa also if there wasn't a major matter.   

**Q:**  There was a lot of trouble at that time such as the Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] problem and the Chinese building roads and they were holding a lot of Tsondu.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, a Tsondu was held on the matter of building the road. At that time, I was the yigtsag [document keeper] for the Tsondu, so if there was a Tsondu meeting I would have been there. Just before Reting resigned, I became the yigtsag official. Also, I was the yigtsag when he almost resigned at the time of the Langdün event as well as at the time of the meeting regarding the accomplishments of Reting and the Khyungram event. So I would know, but I don't remember this at all.   

**Q:**  When did you first get the inkling that Reting was interested in coming back to Lhasa?   

**A:**  He came back for the consecration of the Assembly Hall of Sera Jey in a very elaborate manner. At that time I went to see Reting. It was said that at that time something happened.   

**Q:**  It happened before that?   

**A:**  I have never heard about it happening before that. Probably at that time, I was yet to become a tsipön.   

**Q:**  You had already become a tsipön.   

**A:**  That was after the Lhundrup Dzong trouble.   

**Q:**  That's all I have to ask you about Lhundrup Dzong. Now, I have to ask you about the association called the "West Tibet Reform Association." [Tib. ནུབ་བོད་ལེགས་བཅོས་སྐྱིད་སྡུག] made by Abo Raga, Janglojen and those people in Kalimpong. I saw in the British documents what they did in Kalimpong. But I don't know about the reason why Gendün Chömpel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] was arrested. Some people said that Gendün Chömpel sent a letter to Abo Raga and the British, like Richardson, opened the letter in Gyantse or somewhere. They found out in the letter that there was a map of Bhutan and they had made marks about the Tibetan territories on that map. Because of this, the British were frightened. Actually, when they searched the documents of the association in Kalimpong, they couldn't find letters from Gendün Chömpel. Regarding Gendün Chömpel, the Tibetan Government made an investigation, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you investigate this matter?   

**A:**  Just before the trouble of Gendün Chömpel, the Tibetan Government received a printed version of the Chinese constitution called the Three Principle of People [Ch. sam min zhu yi] translated into Tibetan through a trader in Kolkata. We heard that large number of copies had been sent to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Was that the constitution of the Sun Yatsen?   

**A:**  I didn't see that book, but it was said that there was a drawing of a sickle, a loom and a pen. Therefore, we inquired about who was sending that document to Tibet and heard that Abo Raga was working on that. Then the Tibetan Government talked with the British Government about expelling Kujar, Abo Raga and Janglojen Gung from India. But I heard they couldn't expel Janglojen.   

**Q:**  Did the [Tibetan] government tell them [British] to hand them over?   

**A:**  I have never heard that. Anyway, this was the cause. I heard that they couldn't expel Janglojen and he was smoking opium. I just heard that there was an association and I don't know the name, "West Tibet..." It was said that Gendün Chömpel had connection with them and he was arrested in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When did they arrest Gendün Chömpel?   

**A:**  Probably, this was in the 8th or the 9th month. At that time, I was in America and China.   

**Q:**  When they arrested him, they didn't find anything exactly, right?   

**A:**  Many books in English and Tibetan were searched, but probably there wasn't anything in the books. What they found out was a secret code book for sending telegrams [Tib. གསང་ཏར] and a list of the Tibetan regiments in such and such places with the number of soldiers and such and such military officers.   

**Q:**  Did they discover the map?   

**A:**  No, I didn't see it. At that time, the documents came to the drungtsi and the Investigatory Committee was probably Sambo and Gyetagba [Tib. རྒྱས་རྟགས་པ]. It was a separate committee that interrogated them.   

**Q:**  Were you there when they interrogated Gendün Chömpel?   

**A:**  I wasn't there and I didn't see that. At that time I heard that Gendün Chömpel was a good artist, so I went to him to request him to paint a thanka painting. He was living in the second floor of the house called Wangden Pembar [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབར]. Before that, I had never seen him. At that time it was said that Gendün Chömpel was good in poetics and grammar, and there were many people going to him to study. But I was not attentive. I asked him to paint a thanka called Yenlag Dünpa [Tib. ཡན་ལག་བདུན་པ], but he refused.   

**Q:**  I heard that Gendün Chömpel also went to the Kashag?   

**A:**  Nothing like that happened. Actually, he was not allowed to go to Kashag like that. If he knew some of the kalön, I don't know whether he went to their home.   

**Q:**  I heard that Gendün Chömpel told the Kashag that they have to pay salary to the monks and they should not have those manorial estates. But the kalön regarded this as a joke and didn't consider it. Usually, did he have these kinds of ideas?   

**A:**  I have never heard this.   

**Q:**  I heard that Phünkang Jedrung didn't go to China, so he was dismissed from the tsidrung ranks as well from his government service [Tib. ལས་ཞབས་ཆབས་ཅིག].   

**A:**  I never heard this.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, they didn't have the idea of dismissing him from both the tsidrung ranks and government service. It was planned to just demote him, but Reting Labrang took some action to help him so when the Regent [Taktra] learned about this he got angry and dismissed him completely. I think this was an important thing because this influenced the trouble between Taktra and Reting.   

**A:**  I swear by the three jewels that I have never heard about this. As far as I am concerned, Phünkang's problem was because Phünkang Rimpoche submitted a petition.   

**Q:**  This was long after that.   

**A:**  Probably, I was in America when Phünkang Jedrung was dismissed.   

**Q:**  Let me ask you about the Mission for Congratulating the Victory of World War II [Tib. yügye tashi delek]. One of the purposes was to go to China to negotiate with the Chinese. The British were telling them they shouldn't attend the Chinese meeting, but the Tibetans told the British that we are not going to attend the meeting. Regarding this, Changöba [Tib. བྱ་དངོས་པ] has written that it was obvious that the Tibetan Government was thinking it would be beneficial to go to the meeting.   

**A:**  Which Changöba was that? Was he the son of Changöba?   

**Q:**  It was Changöba Tashi Dorje [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྡོ་རྗེ]. When we look at the situation, Before that, the Chinese [official] Kong was kind of rash and tough and later the Chinese [official] Sheng was kind of tactful and he duped the Tibetans, telling them that it would be good to attend the assembly. Is that correct?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this. The British were suspicious and said that it was mentioned in the Simla Convention that the Tibetans shall not attend the Chinese assembly and the Tibetans said that the mission was just for congratulating the victory in the war. I didn't know anything about the internal plans and the external operations.   

**Q:**  We heard at that time that the Chinese Sheng exerted great influence in closing the English school and those things. He pretended to be a Buddhist and he also asked the deities to go into trance and had a great influence in the great monasteries.   

**A:**  Yes, Sheng was a different person and he also made the situation different than when Kong was there. He also went for circumambulation around the Barkor Street and Temples on the second day after he arrived Lhasa. So people said that he might be a religious practitioner. He also frequently asked the [female] oracle of the Deity Tema [Tib. བསྟན་མ] of Drepung to go into trance and he also displayed the costume of the Tema in his house and he acted very tactful.   

**Q:**  I have some questions regarding India because you were familiar with that. It seems to me that the real cause or reason why the Tibetans lost was that at the beginning the Tibetans had better relations with India, but after India gained her independence in 1947, relations were not that good. So according to the international system [Tib. འགྲོ་སྟངས], the cause of Tibet not being able to maintain it's independence was because of India. The first reason why the relation between India and Tibet worsened was that after India got their independence, they told Tibet that they have to accept the borders between India and Tibet as they did when India was under British control. The Tibetan government said, "We can't do that because many Tibetan territories were put under Indian territory by the British like Mön Tawang [Tib. མོན་རྟ་དབང]. So we should talk about returning these territories." Some people were saying that this was the view of Kapshöba. How did it happen that the Tibetan government didn't welcome the Indian Government?   

**A:**  I have never heard about this strange talks. In 1948, I left [for America]   

**Q:**  In 1947 were you were a tsipön?   

**A:**  Yes, but I have never heard about this.   

**Q:**  Didn't you send a telegram to the Tibetan Government telling them to accept the relationship between Tibet and India, but the Tibetan Government didn't accept it.   

**A:**  No. That was later on when I went to Delhi. Before I left, Pandit Nehru told me that we should make a treaty.   

**Q:**  Right. In 1947 when you went to America, the Indian Government didn't give you money for exchange, so you sent a telegram to the Tibetan Government saying that the Indians didn't give you the exchange money because the Tibetan Government didn't accept the Indian Government.   

**A:**  There wasn't any talk about accepting the Indian Government. The Indians were saying that we should sign a treaty because India has a new government. I sent a telegraph to the government that told them to make the treaty. But this was not signed at the start or even also after I got back to India. Later Nehru told me clearly, "If the Tibetan Government does not trust us and does not dare to sign the [new] treaty, temporarily, we should sign a treaty saying that we will maintain the previous treaty signed at the time of the British. And then we will have further discussions on what will we do." I sent a messenger to deliver this message [to Lhasa]. This was when I was staying in Delhi after returning from America.   

**Q:**  What happened to this?   

**A:**  This was also not signed.   

**Q:**  Is that why the Indians gave Tibetans a hard time later on about money exchanges?   

**A:**  Yes. That is correct, but later they gave us the exchange.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, you asked for to 2 million dollars in exchange, right?   

**A:**  We did it like trading. We said that we are selling our wool to America and Iran so we want the money received in exchange. Regarding that, the Indians said that this was not Tibet's wool because the wool was brought to India and they opened the loads and made it into bales and then sent it abroad. So this became Indian wool. So the Tibetans didn't have the right for that [to get the dollar payments from the U.S., only rupees]. If you had made the wool into bales in Yadong and sent it, then you would have had the right. Later, we had many discussions and it was decided to give us the money exchange and it was not allowed to sell it in India but it should be exported directly. Later it was decided that if the U.S. paid dollars for the wool, we would sell the wool. But this was just left in talks and we couldn't put it into action.   

**Q:**  This was after you came back to India, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that we didn't export wool.   

**Q:**  Before that, there weren't any documents saying that the Tibetan government was not allowed to open dollar accounts in America, yet there wasn't anybody opening bank accounts in the U.S. At that time, how did the government get money from selling wool?   

**A:**  The government would get the wool tax [Tib. ཤོ་ཁྲལ] in rupees only because the Tibetan Government was not doing the wool trade.   

**Q:**  Did you say that you wanted dollars for the wool tax?   

**A:**  No, we didn't say that we want dollars for the wool tax. We were saying we want dollars in exchange paid [to the Tibetan Government] for the wool sold by the individual traders. At that time, it was like waking up from sleep and it was said the Tibetan government would pay the individual traders Indian Rupees or Tibetan currency, whatever they wanted. This talk was raised when one needed the money exchange. Later, they said that if you make the wool into bales in Tibet and export them, then they will pay in dollars. The Indians said that India will pay in dollars for whatever kind of things that belonged to the Tibetan Government and they will produce whatever the Tibetan Government needs like cloth. Later there was trouble regarding importing cloth. By that time, the Tibetans had awakened and knew something about doing trade. Before that, we didn't know that.   

**Q:**  I heard that when Kapshöba was demoted the verdict said "You know what your crime is."   

**A:**  I don't think so. What I heard was that the Communist Chinese opened a restaurant somewhere near Gandenshar [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཤར] in Lhasa when they would hold meetings. At that time, the Guomindang was probably saying that so and so kudrak are working for the communists. At that time, there was unrest in China. Then the Tibetan Government seized this talk and said no matter who wins the victory in China, the Guomindang or the Communists, maybe we should expel all of them. All of them who were said to be spies of Guomindang or the Communist including the wireless operators, therefore, they were expelled.   

**Q:**  I heard that this was the idea of Namseling or Ngabö.   

**A:**  I didn't hear that. At that time, the Kashag told the drungtsi and the drungtsi told the Tsondu. On the very day when the Tsondu was held they approved it and the members of the Tsondu came to Lhasa and gave the order. At that time, when the Chinese were about to leave, a person who was said to belong to Kapshöba said that the soldiers of the Trapchi Regiment are robbing people and the market in Wongtö Shinga [Tib. འོང་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག] was closed and then the shopkeepers in the Barkor also had to close their shops. At that time, Namseling and Chömpel Thubden were the heads of the Deship Office. When they arrested this person, he said that Kapshöba sent him and gave the name of one of the servants of Kapshöba. When this servant was interrogated, he implied that his lord told him to do this. So this was the cause.   

**Q:**  This was not the reason because Kapshöba was very smart. He wouldn't do that. Secondly, he was a kalön, so it wouldn't happen like this because one of his servants did something. There might be other reasons.   

**A:**  This was just one of the causes of the event. Internally, there must be some other reasons, but all of the work regarding this was done by the Shö gaa.   

**Q:**  Anyway, it was not completely clear that Kapshöba sent that person, right?   

**A:**  The servant said that he was sent by Kapshöba.   

**Q:**  And two of the servants were probably whipped.   

**A:**  Did they whip them? They were personal servants of Kapshöba. One of them said that he was sent by Kapshöba and the other said that he didn't know. So who knows?   

**Q:**  Doesn't it seem that he was severely punished for a small matter?   

**A:**  [laughter] There are so many troubles in this world.   

**Q:**  I think that the Regent didn't like Kapshöba from early on when the matter between the Kashag and Reting happened [unclear section]. Put all of these together and it resulted in Kapshöba getting that kind of result. At that time, who passed down the order for Kapshöba's demotion?   

**A:**  It was the Nendrön Thubden Lengmön who passed down the order at the Shö gaa. I didn't hear the content of the order.   

**Q:**  I heard the order was passed down in the hall where they would held ceremonies. I heard that the nendrön told one of the shöndrön called Kelsang Ngawang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ངག་དབང] who was from the tsidrung household of the Magji Keltsul [Tib. སྐལ་ཚུལ] that, "If Kapshöba touches the pouch of his chupa, you go ahead and hit him with a stick."   

**A:**  Later, I heard from outside that there was talk about Taktra returning the regency after 3-4 years to Reting. Actually, Reting appointed Taktra. I knew about that because I was in the Tsondu and we went to Reting to tell him to remain as before. But he insisted that he had to go into retreat. Reting said, "You don't need to worry about this. Taktra Rimpoche, who is the tutor to the Dalai Lama, will take care of the regency." After that, we also went to Taktra and the Tsondu requested him and he accepted.   

**Q:**  The people were saying that Taktra was taking a lot of money in bribes. This might be true, but it looks like all the important officials that Taktra appointed were the officials who had contradictions with Reting Labrang. This was because those officials were not treated well by Reting [unclear recording]. Not only that, but Taktra demoted the officials who had relations with Reting. So it looks like all of those appointments were not because of the bribes.   

**A:**  I don't know what the internal reasons were about that.   

**Q:**  It looks like at that time when the 2nd World War just ended, this was the main period that Tibet should have striven for independence, but the chance was spoiled because of the conflict between the Regents.   

**A:**  I agree with that very much.   

**Q:**  Do you think this happened because the monasteries did something?   

**A:**  It was only a little bit of things that happened with Sera Jey. Otherwise, the Ngagpa and Me [Tib. སྨད] colleges didn't do anything. Especially, Me didn't do anything.   

**Q:**  This was the event 1-2 years earlier, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  All the monasteries tried to stop the school, right?   

**A:**  It was stopped by the abbots. They stopped it because of a very small and strange matter. At that time, the school was already established.   

**Q:**  At that time, you went for the inauguration of the school and Kapshöba was also there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. All the tsipön were there, but not the drunyichemmo.   

**Q:**  There were only two of you tsipön, right?   

**A:**  Was it? The school was closed very easily. It was because the kudrak and the officers in the British Consulate (Dekyilinga) had a soccer competition on the field of Tsidrung Linga [Tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིན་ག] which later the People's Square [Tib. མི་དམངས་ཐང་ཆེན] was built. On that day there was a severe hailstorm and it was said that this was a bad omen.   

**Q:**  It was also said a rabbit appeared there, right?   

**A:**  The rabbit might have run because it was a field. Anyway, after that, in the Tsondu people talked about playing soccer and it appeared like they were kicking the head of the Buddha. I remember that it was Drepung's Shagor Khembo [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར་མཁན་པོ] who cried and said that [they were kicking the Buddha's head]. Because of that the school was closed.   

**Q:**  In 1949-50 or something, you were supposed to go to China with some other people were sent to America, Britain, Nepal and India. In your book you said that regarding the officials going to China, you received a message from Gyalo Thondup's father-in-law talking about meeting you in Hong Kong.   

**A:**  It was not like this. There were instructions [Tib. ལག་ཁྱེར] issued by the Kashag and also another instruction issued by the Tsondu. In the instructions, it was written, "You should stay in a place near China where postal service [Tib. ས་སྦྲག] is available and talk with the Chinese Government." It was not written to go to China. So we thought that Hong Kong would be better.   

**Q:**  No, no, that is not the question. There was talk from Gyalo Thondup's father-in-law, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did this talk take place? Did the Tibetans contacted them or did the Chinese make the move?   

**A:**  Probably, the Chinese made the move, but I didn't know that. We had the plan for holding the talks in Hong Kong, but we were not allowed to go to Hong Kong.   

**Q:**  We heard from some people that they made the contact through radio from Lhasa or through a guide. So how did the Chinese talk about Hong Kong to you? You had thought about that, right?   

**A:**  We had the thought about Hong Kong because it was written [in the instructions] about staying in a place near for us like Burma. We thought of going to Hong Kong, but we were not allowed in. At that time, we received a letter from the father-in-law of Gyalo saying that if we would go to Hong Kong, he will let us in and it would good to come to Hong Kong. This is definite. It wasn't done through radio or from Lhasa.   

**Q:**  According to what you know, at that time the Tibetans didn't make any contact with the Chinese Government, right?   

**A:**  Later, they didn't send anything, but at an early time the government had sent a letter from somewhere because in the instructions given to me, it was written, "We have already told you before not to cause trouble on the border."   

**Q:**  This might be the letter sent to Mao Zedong.   

**A:**  It was written that we have told you before and now we are sending people.   

**Q:**  At that time, when you got the order from the Tsondu, what was your plan?   

**A:**  At that time it was easy for us to work because we were told to go to the border and talk about the methods for Tibet to remain independent as before. This was the point.   

**Q:**  Who you were going to talk to?   

**A:**  Gyalo was saying that if we would go to Hong Kong, they [Chinese] will send delegates.   

**Q:**  I mean before you received the letter from Gyalo's father-in-law, you were told to talk about Tibet remaining independent as before. So what was your procedure for the work?   

**A:**  We thought of going to Hong Kong and sending a letter telling the Chinese to send their representatives. We didn't have a plan to talk inside China. After that, the Chinese knew that we were not permitted to enter Hong Kong and then they sent a letter to us saying, "We know that you have been stopped. Don't be in a hurry to come down. We will send our ambassador to Delhi, and you can talk with him."   

**Q:**  An American diplomat told me that at the same time, in April 1950, there was Law Firm in New York which dealt with the Tibetan trade mission. The Tibetan delegations talked through that Law Firm to the State Department saying that the Americans didn't help us and the British are telling us not to go to Hong Kong, so we are going to Moscow. Was that a strategy to get more cooperation?   

**A:**  This talk is all new for me. We didn't say that. I have never heard this.   

**Q:**  Did you contact with any Law Firm in New York?   

**A:**  Probably, there wasn't anything like this. When we came to America the first time, I came to make publicity for Tibet. I was saying that we were neither part of China nor Britain nor India. We are independent. At that time, there were some people like lawyers coming behind and telling us, "It is a good time for you to join the UN." At that time, I analyzed whether this would be certain or not. I thought this might be the time to join the UN, but probably we would not be able to get support for this. So I reported to our country that people told me about joining the UN. However, I was told, "Keep quite! Don't do many [other] tasks [than what you were sent for]. Make the publicity and come back." As I wrote in my book, I received a letter from Lukhangwa. This was its point. There wasn't anything else.   

**Q:**  Did you have the feeling that the State Department was sympathetic at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, they were showing the appearance that they were sympathetic. At that time when we were meeting with the State Department, the Chinese Ambassador wanted to come with us. William Cook came to see us. But I refused and I told him that we, Tibet, are independent and we don't need a person like the Khamtsan Gegen [Tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] [the person in charge of a monastery's dormitory unit]. Later the State Department told us, "Although it was difficult for us, we met the Tibetans because we thought that the Tibetans would be disappointed." And the State Department met us without the Chinese [being present]. So this indicates that the State Department was sympathetic to us.   

