#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0215.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shakabpa, Wangchug Deden [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ, དབང་ཕྱུག་བདེ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 W. D. Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] was a very prominent aristocratic government official who held the rank of Tsipön. He is the author of "Tibet: A Political History." In this interview, he discusses how the Tibetan Government started giving licenses for private guns and about the problems concerning the Panchen Lama's return to Tibet. The interviewee was one of the tsipön on the Investigation Committee for the Lhundrup Dzong incident and discusses in detail the interrogation and the whipping of the monks involved. The subject also discusses attending the Tsondu's discussion of the resignation of Reting and how Reting recommended that Taktra serve as Regent. He also tells how Reting came back to Lhasa with the hope of getting the regency back and how Taktra didn't show Reting the normal courtesies and how Reting felt that Taktra betrayed him. He also talks about the issue of Reting's celibacy and Delerabten's daughter.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0215_07/H_0215_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  At that time, it was said that some government guns were missing, so whoever had them, it will not do if you don't report this.   

**Q:**  When did they start to give out licenses to own guns in Tibet?   

**A:**  I don't know the time, but it was much later. It was not from the Military Headquarters, but from the Foreign Office maybe. I took licenses for all my guns at that time. This order was such that even if your servants are carrying guns without a license, even in the dzong, the guns can be confiscated by the dzongpön, etc. But I'm not sure when exactly the order was issued.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it during the 13th Dalai Lama's period when they had trouble in the Kham area and Künsangtse Dzasa was demoted?   

**A:**  No, it was much later. But I don't remember whether it was the Reting or Taktra period. During the 13th Dalai Lama's time there was a shortage of guns in the Tibetan armory and something like 360 guns were missing. Tsarong and Dakpo Drumba [Tib. dwags po bhrum pa] and Gajang Tempa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ] were also among the people taking over the guns from Lungshar and Künphel. This affair was very clearly mentioned in the Tenteb [Tib. རྟེན་དེབ] or the List of Guns in the Trapchi Office, and I have copied it from there and put it in my book. At that time, Gajang Tempa was demoted because the guns were missing. The licenses were much later, after the 13th, but I'm not sure whether it was during Reting or Taktra.   

**Q:**  Can you give me detailed information on the exchanges between the Tibet Government and the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  That I have written in my book in detail. I have no more information than that. I had written the letters the government had sent, etc. I don't remember the words of the letter called dayik. This particular dayik arrived in Lhasa while the Tsondu was having discussions on the Panchen's return to Tibet. It was unfortunate it arrived at such a time, as the Kashag handed it over to the Tsondu while they were debating. It started, "From the Panchen Nangmagang (his office in Jyekundo) to the great monastery of Tashilhunpo, all the dzong and the estates on the way via Lhasa should remember this. So the Assembly felt it was an insult to the Tibetan government by mentioning "via Lhasa." This is supposed to be the capital and it had been totally ignored in this dayik. In the dayik it was written that all the dzong and the estates had to make the arrangements for the overnight stays, etc, of the Panchen Lama. They made arrangements for places where 500 horses could be tied in the distance of such and such arm spans away from the camp of the Panchen Lama. And also it mentioned that hay and firewood for the Chinese bodyguards should be prepared, etc. There were many things in that dayik.   

**Q:**  Do you think it had been purposely sent by the Panchen Lama's office to insult [Tib. བཀྱག་བཀྱག་བྱས] the Tibetan government.   

**A:**  I don't know why they sent such a dayik from their point of view. At Lhasa, while the Tsondu was saying that the Chinese bodyguard soldiers would not be allowed to come to Tibet under any circumstances, at such a time the dayik arrived. Lukhangwa was sitting next to me, I don't remember his rank, but I was a tsipa; maybe he was the acting gadrung. Lukhangwa started clearing his throat, and clearing his throat, and then started saying a few words, and then he came out and said we should not allow these Chinese soldiers under any circumstances to cross Tibet. There were certain abbots of monasteries who wanted the Panchen to come even with the soldiers, and he started quarreling with them individually. At about that time all the officials started saying no. It was a Tsondu gyepa, I don't remember which one it was. The chief of the Dalai Lama's stable, pömpo chipönla [Tib. དཔོན་པོ་ཆིབས་དཔོན་ལགས] was there too. The chipön stood up and started crying and screaming at the meeting not to let the Panchen Lama and his bodyguards come. Then all the government officials started unanimously saying no. Then the Tsondu decided to make what is called the great oath [This is the strongest document the Tsondu can do and no one can change it. See below]. This is certain, I was there. And it was all caused because of this dayik.   

**Q:**  Who was this pömpo chipönla?   

**A:**  He was the chief of the Dalai Lama's stable in Norbulinga. This was not planned or prepared, it happened spontaneously. While certain people were against allowing the soldiers and others were saying allow it, the Kashag sent the dayik [to the Assembly meeting] and then the situation developed. It was not premeditated. It was said that such a dayik was not even sent for a Dalai Lama (in the sense of so detailed and show-offish). Then the Tsondu decided to make the oath and they informed the Kashag. The next day, before making the great oath, some people again raised objections to the total ban on the Chinese bodyguards entering. Then finally, it was decided that if it was necessary to allow the bodyguards to come to Tibet, then there has to be a time limit of their staying in Tibet for which a foreign country should be the mediator or witness [Tib. བར་བཞུགས].   

**Q:**  Thereafter, the Tibetan government indicated to all concerned that the decision was to not allow the Chinese bodyguards to come to Tibet, and when this message reached the Panchen Lama, the Panchen Lama took it very seriously and developed some kind depression [Tib. སྐུ་རླུང] and died.   

**A:**  I don't know. But Phabongkha went to Jyekundo to meet the Panchen Lama to discuss many things which you might have read in Phabongkha's biography too. It is true that he went and talked.   

**Q:**  I also heard that Phabongkha wrote a lot of letters to his disciples including among these government officials and the abbots of monasteries, etc. Is that true?   

**A:**  Maybe.   

**Q:**  Weren't there any others who tried to mediate on this issue?   

**A:**  This was discussed between the doji and one of the officials of Tashilhunpo.   

**Q:**  Mediators?   

**A:**  No foreign countries were involved.   

**Q:**  Among the Tibetans?   

**A:**  No. I'm sure no one was there except Phabongkha. His actions seemed to be due to the request of Reting Rimpoche. It was not an official visit. I heard Reting Rimpoche told the Doji to request him to go there [Phabongkha was in the Kham area at the time]. This was rumored in Lhasa at this time. I don't have anything to tell you officially. In Chamdo there were some Tashilhunpo officers who had come and talked with the Doji, who then sent a report to Lhasa. Also, the two, Horji Pemala [Tib. པད་མ་ལགས] and Namseling, through them some report came to Lhasa. From the Bachen [Tib. སྦྲ་ཆེན] side, other information came saying that some people from Tashilhunpo came saying what happened, etc. All this I came to know through the Tsondu because later all these reports were handed over to the Tsondu. So this is how they took the final decision. Then the Tibetan government sent a telegram to the Chinese government requesting them to withdraw all their bodyguards with the Panchen Lama. One report was also sent to Panchen Lama border district officers and the depön were instructed through edicts that if Panchen Lama came he should be welcomed and all facilities rendered, but if the Chinese guards come they were not to be allowed at all. The Tsondu had made this decision with the great oath. This particular edict I have put in my book. This is very clear and I have put it in my book. This is very clear and I have nothing more to say. I was in the meeting. I was a tsipa at that time.   

**Q:**  Regarding the timing of the 13th Dalai Lama, once again I'd like to discuss this. In your interview you mentioned that your uncle Trekhang went to see Kujar often.   

**A:**  I don't know whether he was going to see Kujar, but he was going to see the Dalai Lama very often. The late [Trekhang] Sawang was Tseja at the time. Through sources like this I can understand things and I visited Norbulinga often and could find out what was happening, but I didn't meet him often. However, my other uncle who was a drunyichemmo was very close to Kujar and very powerful. Tseja's house was next to the Yigtsang Office (in Norbulinga). The drunyichemmo came out of the Yigtsang office and then took tea in the Tseja's house and then he said, "Oh, oh" and laid down for a while at Tseja's house. And then he said, "Don't tell others." But the condition of the Dalai Lama is very bad." Then I went to Lhasa and quite a while after sunset, the message reached Lhasa of the death of the Dalai Lama and people started running to the Jokhang. I, along with my elder brother and mother, went to the Tsuglagang to change the melted butter in the golden butter lamp [Tib. གསེར་ཀོང་བརྗེ]. Then the message came to remove banners, etc. and at about the time full darkness came, the drums (Tib. དམ [བརྡ་མ]) started playing from the Potala and Tsuglagang and then people started crying. As far as I'm concerned, it was between 4-6 P.M. when he died. It was not at night and not early morning. It was about the time of sunset. I went to the Jokhang and people were already there.   

**Q:**  Regarding the Lhundrup Dzong incident I have talked to a number of Sera Jey monks and many of them said that they definitely hit the dzongpön with a teapot and firepot, but he was not dead [as a result of this]. He only pretended to be dead and later he even came to Lhasa and had treatment for his injuries and recovered. Then they had some kind of picnic and due to a certain food he ate, he died. His body was sent to the cemetery in Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག] [an area between Sera-Drepung] [this is important for if you are killed by a knife you are supposed to be buried not cut up in a sky burial], right?   

**A:**  I don't know. As far as I'm concerned, I was one of the investigators and as far as I know, he had been beaten up and a few days later he died. It was not that he had come to Lhasa and had a picnic, etc. I had never heard this. I was concerned with this incident because I was the investigator (so I took interest in this).   

**Q:**  In general, it was said that he was hit with a sword or stick. Anyway, he was wounded, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I asked about 5-6 Sera Jey lamas and monks and they all said the same thing.   

**A:**  I don't know what the monks really say about it, but what I heard is what I told you. Ngawang Drakpala, who is popularly known as Lheding [Tib. ལྷ་ལྡིང] drunyichemmo, and I were appointed as investigators. However, we returned the order and said two people are not enough so please make the investigation team all the 8 drungtsi. That day when we were appointed and returned the appointment order asking for it to be made all 8 drungtsi, it was during the winter. The next day the Kashag (via the Regent) appointed the full 8 drungtsi. Then the situation turned worse during the gutor offering in Tse on the 29th of 12th month. Talk came that the Sera monks will not attend the Mönlam. During that time the Dalai Lama was going to attend the Mönlam on the invitation and sponsorship of Tsomönling I think. [The Dalai Lama usually doesn't attend without a sponsor]. So the government started sending orders to Sera that they have to attend and we also requested additional investigators. Then we had Khenche Dombor and Theiji Sambo added. Then it became the joint Theiji and the Khenche [Tib. ཐའི་མཁན་སྦྲེལ་པོ] plus the 8 drungtsi. Among the 8 drungtsi, we excluded the concerned drunyichemmo, Chömpel Thubden. At that time they called monks, not only from Sera Jey but also Ngagpa college and the grain steward [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] to the interrogation, but they didn't come. The representatives of the abbots came, and in their explanations, no such a things like the dzongpön was still alive was mentioned at all. The Sera Jey officials requested that the government not call the involved monks. So this was going to be a big problem.   

**Q:**  Didn't you lash Rebe Gyawu and those monks?   

**A:**  Not on that day. That was after the ringleaders were handed over to the investigators. It was definitely on the 29th of the 12th month that we heard that the monks of Sera Jey and Ngagpa Colleges met and decided to avoid attending the Mönlam Prayer Festival. But since Tsomönling had invited the Dalai Lama to attend the Mönlam, it became very important and necessary for [all] the monks to attend so the government held meetings and sent edicts and also called the shengo and the simkhang depa and told them that they will consider the entire case after the Mönlam and Tsongjö festivals, and in the meanwhile, the monks should attend all functions as normal. But they [the monks] didn't come on the 1st day which involves the practice seating of the monks in the Jokhang for the Mönlam [Tib. གྲལ་འཛིན]. Normally they all come to get the seats which they will use for the next 21 days. The day after this, however, they did come [note: Tsomönling Rimpoche is from Sera Me college, a competitor of Sera Jey]. During the Mönlam we had no trouble and it passed very peacefully. Whether it was immediately after the Mönlam or after the Tsongjö I don't know, but then the monks were individually arrested and lashed. Among them was the famous Sera monk Rebe Gyawu. He talked back to the Investigation Committee very strongly and Kapshöba even hit him on the head with the Samdra. A member of the investigatory committee hitting him with the samdra on the head wasn't nice and it was Kapshöba's too great sycophancy [for Taktra] that he did this. Then Kapshöba ordered them to take those monks down to give them lashes. Then some of the drunyichemmo and me suggested that if we could avoid whipping the monks [which was considered terrible because they are monks] it would be better. But Kapshöba said, "No. look at them [Rebe Gyawu and the Ngagpa monk]. How arrogantly they're talking saying that even if we have to roll up the assembly mattress [Tib. ཚོགས་གདན་སྒྲིལ] we are not going to yield. So they really need a good lashing." Then they told the Bodyguard Regiment soldiers to take them down toward Sharchenjog and on the way somewhere, these two monks were whipped.   

**Q:**  Rebe Gyawu wasn't even directly involved in the killing of the Dzongpön, was he?   

**A:**  Whether he was concerned or not, he got whipped. And even the Ngagpa monk who said he was not concerned, he also got whipped on the way when they were being taken to Sharchenjog. They were beaten just near where the big drum was hanged. The senior tsipön and drunyichemmo walked down to where they were beaten, so we also had to go down. While they are being beating we said, "Oh, that's enough now." By that time, they had received 40-50 very severe lashes. It was a very severe beating.   

**Q:**  It must be more because I heard that Rebe Gyawu had very bad wounds which cut the surface [the flesh out of the buttocks] and he later kept them in a small bag.   

**A:**  No, no. I saw it myself. It was not like that. The Ngagpa monk was almost unconscious. Rebe Gyawu was still very sassy. Those whippers had come from Shöl and they did a very severe whipping and their butts had kind of bruises. I felt very bad. Rebe Gyawu was talking back in a sassy manner but the Ngagpa monk didn't. They also made some lay people who were going to be questioned watch the whipping and they were all shivering by the end of it in fear. I don't remember the date. Later they said they will give a proper explanation with due respect [Tib. འགྲམ་པ་ས་ཕབ]. Then all the monks in Phenpo who were actually involved gradually came. At about that time, the abbot of Sera Jey College ran away. The Ngagpa college abbot was demoted. After the Sera Jey abbot ran away, then the monks obeyed the government's orders. Thereafter the Investigatory Committee met in Shöl in the upper part of the Parkhang [where they keep the wood blocks for printing].   

**Q:**  I heard that while this was being investigated, they were taken from the back side and locked up in Sharchenjog?   

**A:**  No. Those already in the jail in Sharchenjog were brought down to Shöl. They had already got beaten and put down.   

**Q:**  Rebe Gyawu was also beaten and put down, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After the abbot fled, they kind of shrunk [Tib. བབ]. The new monks were brought directly to Shöl. I am not sure who talked as the mediator, but then Sera Jey handed over all its guns to the government. All the guns were brand new Mausers and one or two were Chinese made Ushang [(Ch. wu xiang) and Russian made Ushang which took 5 bullets]. About 100 were brand new Mauser rifles. They got these when Reting was the Regent and Reting got the British to sell Sera Jey 100 new rifles. These were all taken over by the Magjigang and the cost of these was reimbursed to Sera Jey by the Magjigang to be used for one of their prayer rituals called Sangchö Drumchö [Tib. བཟང་སྤྱོད་སྒྲུབ་མཆོད] as an additional endowment. From Sera Ngagpa, they only got a few terrible old guns, but they also paid money for them as an additional capital for the prayer ritual Sangdü Drumchö [Tib. གསང་འདུས་སྒྲུབ་མཆོད]. This was proposed by the Investigation Committee and approved by the Regent. The final verdict was issued at the Shöl Office. Rebe Gyawu was exiled to Hor Drachen. One of the Ngagpa Chandzö was sent to Sangnga Chödzong [Tib. གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་རྫོང] [in South Tibet on the Indian border]. One Phembo layman was sent to Phari. These I remember. Some Lamas and some geshes also got whipped. I still remember that one old geshe who was from Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] in Kham was never asked to come to the investigation committee for explanations, but he was also whipped. He was old and looked sincere and religious and just before his being whipped he said "Gyawa Tsongkapa" [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཙོང་ཁ་པ], [the name of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect] showing his devotion. This was something which was very touching to everybody and even the whippers didn't whip him hard and just did it as a formality. This also moved me emotionally very much but I could do nothing. That year I went to Nepal. We say that whatever we pray to the stupa in Nepal the first time, it will be answered, so I prayed that I will not be involved in such investigating committee in the future. However, to the contrary, I came to be on the Investigation Committee for Reting and it was worse than this one was. I even prayed at Bodhgaya for this.   

**Q:**  What is the real true reason why Reting had to resign? Some people say he had problems with his vows and he didn't want to give the Dalai Lama his ordination.   

**A:**  Later there was such talk.   

**Q:**  What is the true reason? I also heard that monks were talking in the monastery and also stuck up posters that said that it isn't right for Reting to give the vows to the Dalai Lama since he himself doesn't have pure vows?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything about the monks in the monasteries. His resignation was very sudden and I was the Yigtsang (document keeper of the Tsondu) and I had to attend the Tsondu whenever there was a meeting. I was a tsipa at that time. So no such talk had ever come at that time. All those talks came later, after his resignation. The talk that he was not a pure monk and this is why he resigned was being talked about in town. However, whether such talk was authentic or not I don't want to involve myself by making comments. After the confiscation of Reting's property and the investigation, one letter appeared in his own handwriting that said, "so-and-so has a little child so it will have difficulty with the cold weather, etc., so she should be sent before."   

**Q:**  This was Delerabten's [Tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] daughter who was married to Reting's brother.   

**A:**  Yes. Later this was revealed in the Tsondu and they became doubtful of his celibacy. This was after the Reting trouble.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that woman Delerabten's daughter?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Wasn't she Reting's sister-in-law?   

**A:**  Yes, it was his sister-in-law and they had a child also, but it was in his own handwriting. When this was revealed the Tsondu became suspicious. Other than that, there was no actual talk at all. Accordingly, in the draft plan of the Reting Affair, they did not mention clearly that he isn't a pure monk, etc., however, I think they had proposed to change the name of the Dalai Lama [his personal name] which was given by Reting and carried half of Reting's own name Jambey [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ]. This was changed, and they insisted the Jambey part of the name be withdraw. The Tsondu insisted. Wasn't that changed?   

**Q:**  Yes, they changed it. But now the Dalai Lama has insisted to add that name again.   

**A:**  Reting took the first strand of his hair [Tib. དབུ་སྐྲ་གཙུགས་ཕུད] and then he took the monk's vows [Tib. དགེ་ཚུལ] from Taktra. He resigned one year before the Dalai Lama took the monk's vows.   

**Q:**  Then the Dalai Lama's personal name was changed and also a new longevity prayer [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན] was composed.   

**A:**  Oh, most probably no.   

**Q:**  In the name given by the Reting it was Jetsun Jambey Ngawang Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. རྗེ་བཙུན་འཇམ་དཔལ་བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས]. Later, Jambey was withdrawn.   

**A:**  Probably, it had not been withdrawn when the Dalai Lama took his monk's vows. The name was changed because of the Reting trouble and also the longevity prayer was changed. That much I have to say. I have nothing else to say.   

**Q:**  How did Taktra become Regent?   

**A:**  It was very interesting. I don't know. It was decided in one day. Reting resigned and Taktra took over in one day. I was in the Tsondu and the whole Tsondu went to Reting to request him not to resign. The Shö gaa was held in the Potala. We held the Tsondu meeting at the Sasum [Tib. ས་གསུམ] Hall (in the Potala). When we heard the news of Reting wanting to resign, the abbots expressed their shock so we requested that the Kashag ask Reting not to resign, and the Kashag in turn informed us that Reting Rimpoche wasn't listening to such requests. So all of the Tsondu went to the Shö gaa. I was not included inside the room; however I was in the corridor. So the Theiji, Khenche and drungtsi all went inside. We were left outside, but we could hear something. So they made the request, but Reting didn't listen at all. And then he told them that he thinks that Taktra will be the best and most suitable to be the Regent. So then we came back and discussed this in the Tsondu. Then I don't know how that was informed to the Dalai Lama, [perhaps] through the Jigyab Khembo, but the word came that the Dalai Lama said it would be very good if Taktra took over. I don't know who told this, and I have no idea about how the Dalai Lama was informed, but such talk definitely came out in the Tsondu discussions. Then we went to Taktra. It was in the same corridor in the Potala. He was the Dalai Lama's tutor so we went to the Tutor's quarters. It was on the middle floor. This time I was in the room. Taktra said I am very old and I could not do such a thing and then they said the Dalai Lama thinks it's a good idea and Reting Rimpoche himself has suggested your name. And they also told him that according to the divination and the mirror divination [Tib. དཔྲ་ཕབ], there is no choice for Reting but to resign. They insisted and he accepted. Everything was done in one day. A funny thing happened that day. The Chandzö Chemmo of Taktra was running up and down the corridor excited and tried to borrow some tea from the Shö gaa. He even tried to serve the tea to the Tsondu [this was very unusual]. Some of the Tsondu members advised him not to do this as it would be not good [it would look as if it were all fixed]. By the time the Tsondu meeting was over, the old Regent had resigned and the new Regent was confirmed. Everything was over.   

**Q:**  Don't you think they internally agreed?   

**A:**  I cannot say whether they had internally agreed or not. I have nothing to say. Taktra's name was given by Reting. I don't know who told this to the Dalai Lama, but when we went to Taktra, the Dalai Lama's name again was mentioned as thinking it was good to do this. As far as I am concerned, I was only a listener and when they told me to record some points, I did it. I and Ngawang Thöndrub [Angula] were the two yigtsag. As far as we were concerned we had to keep the documents in tact; to put them in the box and get the seals from the officials and put the seals on the box. And whenever the next meeting was held anywhere, e.g., sometimes in Tse and sometimes in Norbulinga and sometimes in the Tsuglagang, we had to show the seals on the box to the officials and open the box and take out the necessary papers and carry it to the Tsondu meeting place. Afterwards we had to put them back in the same way. As far as the writing of the Tsondu documents were concerned, we had to write them. And whenever we could not do them, we had to hire assistants to do them. And whenever they dictated something, we had to write it down. Or if they drafted something on a samdra, we had to copy it out. These were the duties of the two of us.   

**Q:**  There was the talk about handing over the regency in three years, right?   

**A:**  Reting later told me something. When Reting and the Taktra didn't get along well it was after 6-7 years and I was a tsipön already. And we had quite close relations with Reting. The previous Reting who faced the misfortunes was born in Ngodrubding [Tib. དངོས་གྲུབ་ལྡིང], which was my mother's family. Therefore we were very close. When Reting Rimpoche came back to Lhasa [a few years later in December 1944] with great pomp and show, you remember? He had consecrated the new temple. He told me to sit down. He never told me to sit down before. Then I sat down. When I sat down he said come closer, so I moved a little closer. It was in the Reting Summer Cottage (Trokhang) in Lhasa and Rimpoche himself was sitting on a cushion placed in a wooden frame [Tib. བཞུགས་སྒྲོམ]. Then again he said move closer and I did. Now I was very close to him. He said, "We are very close to the Shakabpa family, however, when I was Regent I could not help at all [indicating sadness]. But Taktra has been a great help to you and that is very good. But I faced my main gate to the east with the hope of getting good sunshine [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྒོ་ཤར་ལ་བཏས་ནས། ཉི་མ་ཨེ་དྲོ་བསམ་བྱུང] and I have given the Regency to Taktra Lama. But the horns that have grown on the head, are now sticking in the eyes [Tib. མགོ་ལ་སྐྱེས་པའི་མིག་ལ་ཟུག་བྱུང] [This is a saying in Tibetan that was used when someone did something good to another and the other did something bad back to them.]. He told me this that day from his own mouth. So how do I interpret that? Instead of help. I got harm. So I don't know how to interpret that. Immediately, I got up and prostrated to him and told him to please try to keep the teacher and student relationship pure. And whatever complaints you have please make them straight to Taktra Rimpoche. As far as we are concerned, we cannot influence [Tib. shugs rgayg] Taktra and tell anything to him, but this isn't the same for Reting Labrang. So whatever complaint you have please make it directly to Taktra. This didn't suit Reting's wishes and he didn't like that remark and he started taking snuff. What he really wanted was that I would volunteer to do something. But where is the power I have? I had no power. Don't you think he meant that he discussed this with Taktra and appointed him?   

**Q:**  Reting also talked similarly to many other incarnate Lamas. Don't you think they had some talk before he gave over the power?   

**A:**  It shows they had some talk. It definitely indicates they had talks, but I would never dare to tell this to Taktra.   

**Q:**  Wasn't Taktra very taciturn [Tib. སྒམ་པོ]?   

**A:**  Yes, he was very taciturn and very strict. So how could I tell him?   

**Q:**  Reting was humorous, right?   

**A:**  I knew how to take photographs since the 13th Dalai Lama's time, so we had contact [with me].   

**Q:**  Incidentally, while speaking of photos, can we have a photo of Trimön to be published with your permission?   

**A:**  I have a photograph.   

**Q:**  Reting had told some Lamas that when he met Taktra Rimpoche afterwards he was not open at all to even the normal courtesy conversations and showed an unfriendly face [Tib. ཞལ་རས་ནག་པོ]. Is that true?   

**A:**  Now it is difficult to know because some people [who know] are dead. Otherwise there was a man called Söpönla who was a monk from the Shide monastery and Simpönla who was another old servant of Taktra was also related to him. They both remained with Taktra all the time. They would know. As far as Taktra Dzasa is concerned, he was throwing around his weight and trying to act big, which created a lot of trouble later. Now it is difficult to know what really happened there. As far as I'm concerned, we were the people who were working below so there is no way we could know. During that time there was a lot of talk in Lhasa. Some said Reting will take over and become Regent. There was so much talk.   

**Q:**  Such talk was even in town?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. Even before Reting arrived, while he was only coming to Lhasa, such talk was already going around that he was coming to become Regent again. I went to receive Reting at Mndrl Samba [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོལ་ཟམ་པ]. All the government officials went to receive him. That time Reting came with great pomp. All his servants had identical beards. All the retinue of Reting like the Sösimchösum, the Sthap [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ] [chef], Simgag, nendrön, and shöndrön all had identical beards. [This was very show-offish] Also all of them wore their shawl with the reddish brocade hem [Tib. ཆེ་གྲུ་ཆབ་སྟོད] called Gyenshi Shimig [Tib. rgyan bzhi zhi mog ?] When he departed, all of them wore their shawl with a thick brocade Gyase [Tib. རྒྱ་སེ] hem. The day when he arrived it was an event with extraordinary pomp, but when he left it was also with great pomp, but his purpose had not been fulfilled. I went to Trapchi to see him off. There he gave me a private audience and told me to come to Reting. [He said] During the period of Khuyug Chöpa [Tib. ཁུ་བྱུག་མཆོད་པ] the weather is good so come then. So I said yes and I'll see you. But there was no time to go and moreover it would have been difficult [he's been put in a difficult situation]. Then Taktra Dzasa went up to the place where Reting was staying overnight to see him off. So I thought it was good that now they have some good internal discussions. But I don't know what happened. Whether he came to give a gift or had some message or letter. I don't know. But from then on things went worse and worse. Lhundrup Dzong was the first problem, and this was the second.   

**Q:**  I heard Reting could not tell Taktra that he wants the Regency back, however he spoke very strongly about the Lhundrup Dzong incident and even mentioned that even one's enemies wouldn't do that much [harm].   

**A:**  That would be internal talk that I have no way of knowing. You should not go and listen to everyone and you should ask people who you think will not tell lies. Some will tell lies and make up stories and it will be hard to sort things out. Such wild talk has been in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Yes, I agree, but sometimes very shocking things come out. For example, the story that the Lhundrup Dzong head did not die. So I said why didn't you tell the government, and the monks said they could not explain it to the government.   

**A:**  How could they not be able to explain it to the government?   

**Q:**  When I asked 6-7 Lamas of Sera Jey, they told me that he hadn't died and Tragyab [Tib. བྲག་རྒྱབ] Rimpoche also said the same. I thought that some may have gone to do the last rites, but they had not. They were sure he had not died.   

**A:**  Tragyab Rimpoche is a steady lama.   

**Q:**  And the late teacher Lobsang Wangchuk [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དབང་ཕྱུག] also told me that he hadn't died.   

**A:**  Oh my!   

**Q:**  Maybe they might have spread talk among the monks that he hadn't die.   

**A:**  If he hadn't died, it would be impossible to get punished in that way. During that period, the drungtsi talked very strongly to the Drunyichemmo Chömpel Thubden explaining about the Lhundrup Dzong incident.   

**Q:**  The monks think it was not only among the kudrak but also the drunyichemmo. Since they were colleagues of the drunyichemmo, they think you all covered this up.   

**A:**  Leave aside the tsipön, the drunyichemmo themselves put harder questions than those of the tsipön. For instance, Ngawang Drakpa told him you have a good name and a big name now because people say you are doing very well, but if you follow what others say and insist things here, then it will create lots of problems. You have to know things there really well. [i.e. they not only interrogated the monks but also the drunyichemmo]. Then Bumtang said, "I swear by the three jewels that I am not meddling in this, whatever they said truly, that's it." I didn't say much, but Lukhangwa was there, or maybe it was Kapshöba, and he also said you have to be very careful otherwise the name of all the drungtsi will be dragged in the mud. The decisions of this should be straightforward like we have a saying in Tibetan that an egg should be able to carry a horse [Tib. སྒོ་ངས་རྟ་འཁྱོགས] [if the egg is exactly upright, the egg won't break even if a horse stands on it - i.e. if it is true, nothing can effect the decision]. But I was a junior member and couldn't say much personally, but Ngawang Drakpala said a lot. The Ta Lama didn't say much. Drunyichemmo Lheding told him that it is your own disgrace. To this Chömpel Thubden replied after blowing his nose and putting his shawl over his shoulder. "Who made this first? Wasn't it the Tsondu who decided that for the well being of the people that all these old debts should be written off. And if its within ten years then all the interest should be written off. And if it is within five years it should be only light interest. Wasn't it the decision of the Tsondu?" he said. The decision of the Tsondu should be carried out by the dzong, and Lhundrup dzong happens to be my salary-estate [Tib. ཐབ་རྟེན] and my brother happened to be there. So it was the Tsondu's decision he replied.   

**Q:**  Was the fight in Lhundrup Dzong over this question?   

**A:**  Of course. Yes. Because the Tsondu decided to eliminate these debts, the people refused to pay them and monks wanted to collect them and the dzong supported the people. This is how it happened. But in the Investigation Committee, Lukhangwa and Lheding Drunyichemmo questioned Chömpel Thubdenla very strongly.   

**Q:**  How did it really happen?   

**A:**  There were a lot of appeals to the Kashag from the Phembo, Sey [Tib. ཟས] and Chushul areas regarding those old debts. Then the Kashag passed these on to the Tsondu and they made the decision and presented it to the Kashag and they approved it and issued orders to all the dzong. The dzong announced this to the public and then the monks came to collect it and the people refused to pay. Then the monks went to the dzong and the trouble started like that. That was the root of the trouble. The root cause was the many appeals that came to Kashag over these debts and then the Tsondu's decision. In other areas, I don't know if they had similar troubles, but in Lhundrup Dzong it created major troubles.   

**Q:**  I also heard that the monasteries decided not to abide by this decision since it involved a large amount of the income of the monasteries [i.e. from the interest].   

**A:**  No, I never heard that. Moreover, when the Tsondu decided this the monasteries had to put their seal on it [the decision], so that was the end of it. They could not do something separately. If they had problems or complaints they would have to have done it before they put their seal on the Tsondu's decision. They did not do that so probably it wasn't true.   

**Q:**  I also heard this situation was done specially by the Taktra side to irritate Reting Rimpoche.   

**A:**  No, no, no. That was definitely not the case.   

**Q:**  When Taktra first took over, it was very good and he even announced that there will be no personal traders doing business for Taktra Labrang [as had been the case for Reting].   

**A:**  Yes, it was good and it was in his first year that he announced that his Labrang had no traders, and if any people claim to be such, then it should be reported immediately.   

**Q:**  I also heard that this had irritated Reting.   

**A:**  Yes. I also heard that this irritated both Reting and the Yabshi because when Taktra said there was no private trader working for him, indirectly he indicated that there was one before. So in the beginning it was very good. At that time the strongest traders in Tibet were Panda and Sandu who were doing the wool business. They also said that it was great that he announced this. This I also heard. But later it had become: "It didn't help the liver and it created tumors in the kidney." [Tib. གློ་བ་ལ་མ་ཕན་མཆིན་པའི་སྐྲན] [this means it didn't help the people but created problems between Reting and Taktra]. It also damaged the collection of Reting and Yabshi's products that they had loaned out. Since Reting had retired and the present Regent was indicating he had nothing of this sort, it naturally damaged Reting Rimpoche's collection of many of the things owed to the Labrang.   

