# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0086.01   
##  : with Jija, Tashi Dorje [Tib. སྤྱི་ལྕགས, བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྡོ་རྗེ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 27 October 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jija, Tashi Dorje  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca 62  
**Date of Birth:** ca 1931  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jija was a lay aristocratic official of the Tibetan government. In this interview, he discusses being the dzongpön of Powo Chödzong, and his time in Chamdo when he fled with Ngabö. He also talks about how they were captured and detained in Chamdo and how later he was sent to Lhasa with the tsidrung Jangjenlokho to deliver a report to the Kashag regarding the peace talks. Additionally, he discusses his work at the Trapchi Legung Office printing Tibetan currency, and finally, how he went to Norbulinga as a bodyguard for the Dalai Lama, and how he attended the Assembly Meetings during the 1950 unrest (singdru) and signed his name while there.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0086_01/H_0086_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me about whatever you saw and heard. In 1950, the battle in Chamdo started, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  When the battle took place in Chamdo, I was in Powo Chö<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་ཆོས་རྫོང]. There were three dzong in the Powo area and Chödzong was one of them.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, did you go to Kham with Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] or with Ngabö [Tib. ང་ཕོད]?   

**A:**  I didn't go with either of them. I just went to Powo Chödzong by myself.   

**Q:**  When did you go there?   

**A:**  It was in 1950. At that time, Lhalu and Ngabö were there in Chamdo and the war had already taken place down there. At this time, I arrived at Chödzong as the dzongpön.   

**Q:**  Did you stay there continuously or what?   

**A:**  When I was there, the new governor of Kham, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</a>, was taking over for the old one. Ngabö had arrived at Chamdo, and Lhalu was about to leave. I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of Powo and the Powo area was under the jurisdiction of the doji. So at that time, I went to Chamdo to request the governor to help the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of Powo in terms of their living conditions and to get some exemptions [on taxes]. That's how I came to Chamdo. When I arrived at Chamdo, the People's Liberation Army had already approached near Chamdo. Before that, we didn't know anything because Powo was a remote place. So I went to Chamdo directly. When I got there, the People's Liberation Army had arrived at places 1-2 days from Chamdo.   

**Q:**  At that time, they hadn't taken over Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, so at that time, it was out of question to talk about the living condition of the miser.   

**Q:**  Did you stay in Chamdo continuously?   

**A:**  I didn't get the chance to stay there continuously because when the People's Liberation Army came very near to Chamdo, Ngabö and those people ran away, and I also ran away with them. At first, Ngabö planned to go up to Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང], but the People's Liberation Army had already blocked the Lagong Ngamda [Tib. ལ་གོང་ལྔ་མདའ] route. Therefore, he had to return back and stayed in Drugugön [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན] Monastery in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, Ngabö planned to go to Lhodzong, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he planned to go to Lhodzong and hold talks [with the Chinese], but he couldn't go there because the route was blocked.   

**Q:**  At that time, which of the Tibetan regiments were there in Riwoche [Tib. རི་བོ་ཆེ]?   

**A:**  I just arrived at Chamdo for 1-2 days, so I am not sure about that. Depön Phulungwa [Tib. ཕུ་ལུང་བ] was probably there.   

**Q:**  Which regiment was that?   

**A:**  I am not sure. We stayed in Drugugön Monastery overnight and then the People's Liberation Army arrived at Drugugön Monastery. All of us were taken to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  I heard that you were in Chamdo, but I didn't know how you got there.   

**A:**  I didn't have time to do anything in Chamdo because it was in a chaotic situation, like boiling soup [Tib. ཐུག་པ་འཁོལ]. So I just had to run away.   

**Q:**  I heard this though it was not that clear. When all of the Tibetan soldiers were arrested and they collected the guns, regarding this matter, there was a little bit of trouble among the Chinese on what they should do with the weapons. There was kind of a trouble between Ngabö and Wang Qimei. Do you remember this?   

**A:**  I don't know anything about this. After we were taken to Chamdo, the officials above the fourth rank [Tib. རིམ་བཞི] were shut in Sidogthang [Tib. སྲི་ཟློག་ཐང], which was the house where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</a> stayed and the offices were held. The fifth rank officials [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] and the seventh rank [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ] like us were shut in the Tibetan Regiment located in Chamdo. We were kind of detained. The trouble regarding the guns occurred in Sidogthang. We didn't hear anything about that because we were in the regiment.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay there?   

**A:**  We were detained for about 20-30 days. After that, we were released and sent to our own lodgings.   

**Q:**  You stayed in Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we didn't have houses, but we stayed in our lodging inns.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  Then Ngabö sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] and the lay official Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] to Lhasa to deliver a report. It was written in the report that, "We are unable to handle the People's Liberation Army militarily, so it would be better to hold peace talks with the Chinese." When the two of them went up, the Dalai Lama was probably about to leave. They didn't receive a response for a very long time. After that, Tsidrung Jangjenlokho Lodrö Kesang [Tib. ལྕང་ཅན་བློ་ཁོག་བློ་གྲོས་སྐལ་བཟང], who later became the Magji Khenjung, and I were sent to deliver a report. When we delivered the report...   

**Q:**  Did you go to Lhasa or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**A:**  We came to Lhasa. At that time, the Dalai Lama hadn't left for Yadong.   

**Q:**  Were you the first or the second?   

**A:**  We were the second. They didn't get any response, so the second was sent. Two days after we delivered the report, the Dalai Lama left. Then we just stayed home and went to our previous offices, and they didn't give any response to that.   

**Q:**  When you arrived at Lhasa, to whom did you deliver the report? Did you deliver it to the Kashag?   

**A:**  At that time, the Kashag was held in the Potala Palace and there were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>: Surkhang [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང], Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར]. So we went to the Kashag and delivered the report.   

**Q:**  Did you deliver it right away?   

**A:**  We stayed overnight at home and delivered it the next day. At that time, they didn't say anything. We told the Kalöns, "Ngabö said that we didn't receive a response for the previous report, so please respond to this report quickly if you are going to hold the peace talks."   

**Q:**  Was the content of the two reports same?   

**A:**  The main content was probably same. But I didn't know what was written in the previous report. In the report that we delivered, it was written, "If you want to hold peace talk with the Chinese, please do this   

**Q:**  Did they write that the talks should be held in Chamdo?   

**A:**  They didn't mention the name of the place. It was written, "It would be good to hold peace talks because we can't handle them by force." The previous one also might have been the same. After 2 days, the Dalai Lama left and there wasn't any response.   

**Q:**  What work did you do after that in Lhasa at the end of 1950?   

**A:**  Then I worked in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Legung [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་ལས་ཁུངས]. This was the mint where the currency of the Tibetan government was printed. It was located near the regimental headquarters.   

**Q:**  For how long did you work there?   

**A:**  Until 1959, I did that work.   

**Q:**  From the time the 17-Point Agreement was signed until the revolt in 1959, what kind of major events took place in Lhasa?   

**A:**  You have already heard much more than I can tell you. I was here at that time, but I had a kind of childish thoughts and I was not that attentive about those things.   

**Q:**  Do you remember anything about the matter regarding the use and abolishing of the Tibetan currency?   

**A:**  I don't remember anything. I was working at the place where the mint was located, but I don't remember talking about the usage of Tibetan currency. The high-ranking officials might have talked about that internally. But I didn't hear about this.   

**Q:**  In 1958, the Kashag held the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</a> meeting in Lhasa on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> issue. Were you one of the members of that meeting?   

**A:**  No, I wasn't. Do you mean the meeting regarding mollifying the Central Committee and ceasing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>'s disturbance?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I didn't attend this meeting.   

**Q:**  How did you get involved in the revolt in 1959? Did you stay here or did you go to [India]?   

**A:**  In 1959, when the revolt took place and when all the people and the government officials were going to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, I also went there. At that time, the government didn't call the government officials to come to the meeting. The officials went there voluntarily to act as the bodyguard of the Dalai Lama. I also went there voluntarily and I stayed in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  For how long did you stay there?   

**A:**  I stayed there until the war took place.   

**Q:**  What date was that when you went down?   

**A:**  The revolt took place on the 10th. I probably went there on the 13th. At the beginning, we went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and they held some meetings. Then I came back home. After two days, I formally went there and stayed in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  After awhile, did they arrest you?   

**A:**  I ran away to India.   

**Q:**  How did you run away?   

**A:**  When the Chinese fired cannons at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, we could no longer stay there and I and another partner left from the northern gate of Norbulinga. We went through the marshy area [Tib. འདམ་ར] in Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག] and we climbed Mount Gephel [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ] [behind Drepung], and then we went through Nyarenang [Tib. མྱང་རལ་ནང] and Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ].   

**Q:**  Where did you go from Phembo?   

**A:**  Actually, we planned to go to Lhoka, though we didn't have enthusiasm to go to India. This was because, in Lhoka, there were no People's Liberation Army [soldiers] and the Khambas were there. If we went to Lhoka through Tagtse [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ], it was closer. But we thought that the People's Liberation Army must have been there. So we took a detour and from the north, via Taglung [Tib. སྟག་ལུང], Phöndo [Tib. ཕོད་མདོ] and Lungshö [Tib. ཀླུང་ཤོད], we arrived in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>. Then we crossed the Drigung Magong La Mountain Pass and arrived at Wölga [Tib. འོལ་དགའ]. From there, we went to Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང]. Actually, it takes four days on horseback to Tradruk [Tib. ཁྲ་འབྲུག], but at that time, it took 17 days.   

**Q:**  After that, did you arrive at Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ] Dzong?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. We went through Tradruk, Chongye [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས], Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ] and Lho Donkhar [Tib. ལྷོ་མདོ་མཁར], and then we went to Mön.   

**Q:**  Just before the revolt actually took place and when you were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, what was your thinking? Were the lay officials and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and representatives thinking that they would win the war? Of course, you were there for the bodyguard of the Dalai Lama, but what else did you think at that time? What was the purpose of opposing the People's Liberation Army? Did they talk about how the Americans would help you?   

**A:**  There were a lot of rumors. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was fighting the battles in Lhoka, it was said that they were very powerful and one Tibetan soldier could kill 5-6 Chinese. It was also said that the Americans were helping them and air-dropped guns. But I never thought that we would win the battle. I thought we would lose. Let alone we Tibetans, the PRC fought with the Americans in Korea. But, at that time, all people were going there to be the bodyguards for the Dalai Lama. I was a government official, so I had to go there no matter whether I was capable or not.   

**Q:**  Were there many other people thinking that we would win the war?   

**A:**  Probably, some people might have been thinking that we would win the war.   

**Q:**  Were there Tibetans soldiers among the Khambas?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there weren't any Tibetan soldiers. But after the revolt broke out, some of the soldiers joined Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  There were some Tibetan soldiers with the Dalai Lama, or were there Khambas?   

**A:**  The main force was Tibetan soldiers, but after crossing the river, there were probably some Khambas. In the beginning, all of the bodyguards were Tibetan soldiers.   

**Q:**  Most of them were from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before the revolt took place in Lhasa, the General Command Center [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང] was set up in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you attend the meeting when you signed your names?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there. The meeting was held on the second day and at that meeting, we signed in order [a document] to differentiate [Tib. དབྱེ་འབྱེད] [who was on the Tibetan side]. On that day, I signed my name and I came back home. The next day, I went down and stayed there.   

**Q:**  At that time, who presided over the meeting?   

**A:**  There was Lhalu, Jawtang Ta Lama [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང་ཏ་བླ་མ], Shügüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར].   

**Q:**  Were there people's representatives?   

**A:**  Yes, there were.   

**Q:**  Who were the main representatives of the people?   

**A:**  They were people like Manang Abo [Tib. མ་ནང་ཨ་ཕོ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་པ] 1. The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder. 2. The head of the Shölpa leygung.">Shölpa</a> Tatongwa [Tseden Wangchug] [Tib. ཞོལ་པ་རྟ་གཏོང་བ་ཚེ་བརྟན་དབང་ཕྱུག], who was in charge of sending corvée horses in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> and stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] or somewhere.   

**Q:**  There was also the doctor Anan La, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was also one of the leaders and he was also going back and forth carrying a medicine bag and giving treatment to the wounded when they were firing cannons.   

**Q:**  Were there any reforms to the mint in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> between 1951-59?   

**A:**  No, there weren't any reforms. We printed the currency continuously.   

**Q:**  You were printing coins, right?   

**A:**  We printed coins and also paper currency.   

**Q:**  Normally, when you had to print some new currency, who would give the order?   

**A:**  The Kashag would give the order and they also had to report to the Dalai Lama. At that time, we printed a new coin worth 10 sang. This was probably after the liberation and the People's Liberation Army arrived at Tibet. We submitted a plan of the design of the coin to the Kashag and the Dalai Lama made the decision. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Leygung didn't have the authority to make the decision.   

**Q:**  Did you make an annual financial budget for printing the currency or did the Tsikhang make it?   

**A:**  At that time, we didn't have any annual financial budget. Normally, we had the printed currency and the Kashag would send the requisition order [Tib. འཛིན] indicating the amount of money that should be paid to the offices, and then we would take the requisition order and pay the money. We didn't have any plan to print a fixed amount of currency in a year. We didn't have any budget.   

**Q:**  So it was like a bank, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was a mint and also a bank.   

**Q:**  What was the Tsikhang doing at that time?   

**A:**  It was in charge of accounting [Tib. རྩིས་རྒྱག] for the barley income of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates that belonged to the government. They didn't have anything to do with money.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coin was used in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> in your bank?   

**A:**  Yes, sometimes we exchanged the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> also. At that time, China told us to exchange the dayan with the Tibetan currency. So we had a lot of dayan.   

**Q:**  Who was your leader? What was the name of your office?   

**A:**  It was called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Electrical Machinery Plant [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་གློག་འཕྲུལ་ཁང]. Actually, it was the armory and the mint.   

**Q:**  Who was the main leader of that office?   

**A:**  At the beginning, it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, Tsewang Rinzin [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་ཚེ་དབང་རིག་འཛིན]. After he was promoted to kalön, one of the leaders was Changkhyim Khenjung Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ་མཁན་ཆུང་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ], the younger brother of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] who is in America. The other one was Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམ་པ] and the other was Chapa Kelsang Wangdü [Tib. ཆ་པ་སྐལ་བཟང་དབང་འདུས].   

**Q:**  What were their ranks?   

**A:**  They were all of the fourth rank.   

**Q:**  After the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, was there any relationship with your office?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't any. At that time, the Kashag sent the requisitions and we just paid the money.   

**Q:**  In 1956, people were talking about reorganizing [Tib. བཅོས་སྒྲིག] the Tibetan soldiers and exchanging the currency. That didn't have any impact on money exchange, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I didn't know about that.   

**Q:**  Do you remember in 1954 how the Dalai Lama and the kalön went to China?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, they talked about the Tibetan currency. The Central Committee thought that it would be better to abolish the Tibetan currency, but it got opposed and that didn't work out. I heard that after awhile, the kalöns told the Cenmtral Committee that we needed support for our paper currency and the Central Committee gave an order and permission to give a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> to support the Tibetan paper currency.   

**A:**  That was probably right. In the beginning, when the People's Liberation Army arrived, they were using only <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> and they didn't have the paper currency Renminbi [Ch. ren min bi]. Later, they printed the paper currency because they couldn't endure [Tib. ཨར་མ་རྟེན་པར] spending dayan continuously. These were all internal talks. We didn't know even a small part of it.   

**Q:**  I mean, if the had given a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> to support the paper currency, then the money should have arrived at your bank, right?   

**A:**  No, they didn't support <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> for us. They just exchanged dayan, but the Central Committee didn't give dayan to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Bank. Basically, Chapa Kelsang Wangdü is still here and he was the Chairman of the Political Consultative Conference [Ch. zheng xie zhu xi]. He will tell you in detail about this.   

**Q:**  Are there any <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> still alive and living here?   

**A:**  Phulungwa is still here. He was one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Does he have quite a good memory?   

**A:**  He is okay. though he is very old.   

**Q:**  Where does he belong to?   

**A:**  He is the Vice Chairman of the Municipal Political Consultative Conference of Lhasa [Ch. shi zheng xie zhu xi; Tib. གཞོན་པ]. There isn't any other depön. Maybe, Phulungwa can tell you about some other depön.   

**Q:**  Thank you very much.   

