# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0211.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Phabongka Chandzö [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ་ཕྱག་མཛོད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Phabongka Chandzö [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ་ཕྱག་མཛོད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 67  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Phabongka [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] was the chandzö for the famous Phabongka Rimpoche. In this interview, he talks about the death of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Pandatsang incident in Lhasa in 1934. He also discusses the trip of Phabongka Rimpoche to Jyekundo in 1937 to meet the 9th Panchen Lama and request that he return to Tibet, and about how Reting Rimpoche's asked Phabongka Rimpoche to be Regent in his place in 1941.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0211_01/H_0211_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The former Dalai Lama passed away for the benefit of others [Tib. དགོངས་པ་གཞན་དུ་གཤེགས] on the 30th of 10th month in the Water-Bird Year, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, where were you staying? And where was the Lama Vajradhara [Tib. བླ་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང] [Phabongka] staying?   

**A:**  Probably, he was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When did you hear about that [the death of the Dalai Lama]?   

**A:**  I don't know what date he passed away. While we were staying relaxed, we heard that the Dalai Lama was sick. At that time, the lay officials and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and the Tibetan people prepared for the longevity prayer [Tib. ཏེནཤུག] and requested him to live long. Later his sickness got worse and it seemed as if was not going to live long. They asked for the help to the Lamas and the government performed many rituals, but it didn't help. At this time, they consulted the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> deity through the oracle. I heard that they offered the Dalai Lama a medicine, but I don't know which medicine. I heard that they offered him Jülen Trugtshag [Tib. bcud len ?]. Anyway, no matter what they had offered, Nechung said through the oracle that they should offer the medicine called Pawo Nyinji [Tib. དཔའ་བོ་ཉིན་བྱེད] and Nechung gave this medicine while he was in trance. It appeared that they gave him the wrong medicine containing camphor [Tib. ག་བུར] for his fever sickness. Since the lay officials and the tsidrung and all people didn't like the Dalai Lama's personal attendant and favorite Kujar [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར] [Künphel La] [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས] because he was too powerful, so it was inevitable that all people talked against Kujar. Anyway, whatever they had done or not done, the blame fell on Kujar and the Nechung oracle.   

**Q:**  And on Doctor Champa la [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ལགས] too, right?   

**A:**  Yes, all of them were arrested and then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and the lay officials held the new Tsondu and then Reting became the Regent.   

**Q:**  At that time, probably, they told Phabongka Lama to be the Regent. When did that happen?   

**A:**  It was not like that. It was later at the time of Reting and Taktra.   

**Q:**  I will ask you about that later on. At that time, when Kujar was banished and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> got into trouble, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] also had trouble and you talked a lot about that, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Which happened earlier? The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> event or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> one?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was earlier and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> was later. I have a lot to tell you about the Panda event, but I am not going to tell you in detail. I will just tell you briefly.   

**Q:**  Please tell us the detailed account. We don't know anything about this.   

**A:**  If I have to tell you in detail, I would have to tell you from the root. In the beginning, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a>'s head [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] was the Merchant Nyijang [Tib. ཉི་བྱང྄]. He was the sponsor who invited the Dalai Lama to the Assembly of the Mönlam and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> Festivals [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་ཚོགས་མཆོད]. He was an extraordinary person. The second powerful head was called Abo Nyima Gyentsen [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་ཉི་མ་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. In short, he was called Nyimala.   

**Q:**  Was Nyima-la the brother of Nyijang or his son?   

**A:**  Nyima, Raga [Tib. རབ་དགའ] and Yamphel [Tib. ཡར་འཕེལ] were all brothers and were all the sons of Nyijang. Later, Nyimala became the head of the family. At that time Nyimala became a favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ] and he sent him everywhere. He used to receive a lot of messages on samdra and I copied many of them. My writing was not good, but Nyimala would not trust other people. I just copied the messages. Otherwise, I didn't have anything to meddle into their matters. He trusted me that I wouldn't tell anybody since it was not allowed for anybody to know the about that. Later there was a person called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Rupön [Tib. རུ་དཔོན] who was Panda Tobgye [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱལ]. He was staying in Kham.   

**Q:**  He was appointed as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> by the government, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time Depön Nornang, who was the father of the Nornang, the Secretary of the Tibetan Military Headquarters [Tib. དམག་དྲུང] was in Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས]. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> rebelled slightly against the government all of a sudden.   

**Q:**  Why did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye rebel?   

**A:**  I didn't know the reason why he rebelled. He was in Kham. Maybe he didn't get along well with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>. Who knows? <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye was a very brave and unscrupulous [Tib. རྫབ་ཆེན] person who had many high quality men [under him]. He was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> then. When Nyimala was in Lhasa and working as the favorite to the Dalai Lama, all of sudden, Tobgye went to kill Nornang Depön and all of the soldiers also rebelled. So the depön had to run away to Chamdo. When this disturbance happened in Kham, the government sealed Panda's house in Lhasa. At that time, the main persons staying in Lhasa were Nyimala and Yamphela and their wife Sonamla [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Was she the wife of both of the sons?   

**A:**  No, she was the wife of Yamphela. Nyimala's wife was Tashi Yangdzom [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་གྱང་འཛོམས] who was daughter of the Traya [Tib. བྲག་གྱབ] Dorotshang [Tib.? tshang]. There was a daughter of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> called Chime [Tib. འཆི་མེད] who used to be the bride of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Garjang [Tib. ཞོལ་མགར་བྱང] and later she was my wife. After I lost my celibacy, I was working for the [Phabongka] Labrang. I asked for leave from the Labrang, but it was not granted and it was said that a new <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> should be appointed and the Tratsang appointed me as the layman Chandzö. At that time, Pandatsang Nyimala was our sponsor and I am very grateful to him because they took extraordinary care of me. After Phabongka Lama passed away, the Labrang was left without any savior and supporter.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Lama was alive, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> was sealed, the following persons were the outside supporters of Pandatsang: Gendag Ugyenla [Tib. རྒན་བདག་ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས], the bald father of Tshatrutshang [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང] who is now living in Nepal and who was a clerk in the Agriculture Office [Tib. སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུང]. He was also my teacher in school. And there was Markham Drogpatshang [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས་འབྲོག་པ་ཚང] and me.   

**Q:**  Was he the father of Drogpatshang?   

**A:**  Yes. We held a meeting outside. At that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> was sealed, but we didn't know what happened and we were discussing what we should do.   

**Q:**  Actually, they didn't really seal the house. They just closed the door, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They blocked the door and the soldiers surrounded the house so there was no way to go in and out. But we could ask the people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> and Nyimala said we are innocent and it was because Tobgye rebelled in Kham. Then we said, "If this is the case, there isn't any problem. We have to make an appeal to the government." We acted as the guarantor and made the appeal to the Tsondu gyendzom.   

**Q:**  At that time, weren't the abbots of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> in the assembly?   

**A:**  In the beginning they were there, but later they withdrew. Later we hired the monks of Sendregasum. It was the time when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön [Tib. ཀྲི་སྨོན] was very powerful. We went to see him and we could take the measure and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>'s people staying in Lhasa were proved to be innocent and they knew that Tobgye rebelled. So the government didn't seal the house, but the soldiers still surrounded the house. At that time, in the Pandatsang house there were about 20 high quality men including 5-6 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག] A category of young tough guys that Khamba traders and rich households retained for protection, especially when going on trading trips, but in the end for anything the &quot;boss&quot; needed done. They lived and ate with the family and were very close with them, almost like relatives.">aptru</a>, the best quality ones. later when I went to hand over the guns to the government, there were about 120 rifles and pistols. After we did that, the government's anger towards Panda subsided to some extent. At that time they needed guarantors and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> [Tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] acted as the guarantors. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Lingtshang, the tall guy who used to be the monk official bodyguard of the Regent, the Shö Simgag [Tib. ཤོད་གཟིམ་འགག], was the supporter who got Loseling to become the guarantor.   

**Q:**  He was called Chöyang [Tib. ཆོས་དབྱངས], right?   

**A:**  Yes. He went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> and made them agree to be the guarantor. I used to control the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> according to my wishes, so I brought the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Sera Me who was nicknamed Dzipa, [the mythological animal decorated on the pillars] as the guarantor. At that time, in addition to that, the Ex-Ganden Tripa [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་ཟུར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and our Phabongka Lama went to the Kashag to ask them to favor <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> [Tib. ངོ་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  The Ex-tripa was called Champa Chödrag [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཆོས་གྲགས], right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chandzö of Lamoshar [Tib. ལ་མོ་ཤར] was sent as the acting guarantor for the ex-tripa. He was an eloquent Khamba.   

**Q:**  He was called Chandzö Nyakhamba [Tib. ཉ་ཁམས་པ], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Phabongka Lama also went in person, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I brought our Lama in person to the Kashag. At that time, the Kashag was assembled outside Reting Labrang and the most of the powerful shape was Trimön. There also was Langchungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Gendün Chödar [Tib. བཀའ་བློན་བླ་མ་དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་དར] who was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང]. At that time, we reported the Kashag.   

**Q:**  How did they act when Phabongka Lama came to the Kashag?   

**A:**  They didn't have anything to do.   

**Q:**  Did the ministers stand up?   

**A:**  When our Lama entered the Kashag they had put a cushion for him which was equal to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>'s cushions. Then the Lama and those people went in and asked for the forgiveness saying that those people [Panda] are not to be blamed.   

**Q:**  At that time did the Lama pull down his monk's shawls from his shoulder to pay respect [Tib. གཟན་སྐྱུར་ཕབ]?   

**A:**  He offered a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the Shape.   

**Q:**  Were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> seated?   

**A:**  They were standing up. Then our Lama said to the Kashag, "Please give whatever punishment to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye according to his crimes, but the Panda people in Lhasa are definitely innocent. Panda Nyima has been serving the Dalai Lama until now. Panda Yamphel and those people were the younger brothers and they were not involved in that." So the Kashag's anger subsided and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> wrote an agreement in the Kashag and gave it to our Lama and he showed it to the guarantors. The Kashag's agreement said, "Check the agreement to see whether the contents of your discussion was completely written in the agreement or not. Then our Lama and Nyakhamba came down to the meeting with the pledge. Then Gendag Ugyenla and we discussed and made corrections as much as we could. Ugyenla was a skillful and learned person and he made the corrections about the matter that Panda hadn't concluded the accounting of his being the government's trader [Tib. གཞུང་ཚོང]. Regarding this, the Kashag didn't know how the account would be cleared. Internally, Panda had made the calculation for clearing the accounts, but we said that the account is yet to be cleared and all Panda's wealth is included in this account. If you seal our house and confiscate our wealth, then we would not have the things to clear the accounts of the government trade. Actually, the entire property of Pandatsang was not enough to clear the accounting of the government trade. If we got our property, then we will clear the account. Otherwise, we won't have the means to clear the account. So it was written in the pledge, "The guarantors, Phabongka Dzöpa Trinley Palgye [Tib. མཛོད་པ་འཕྲིན་ལས་དཔལ་རྒྱལ], Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> will guarantee that Pandatsang will clear all the accounts of the government trade." We, the guarantors, put our seals on the pledge and the pledge was about to be settled, but in the meantime, it was kind of disturbed [Tib. འཁྲོག་ཐེབས] and it was delayed for 1-2 days.   

**Q:**  How did it get disturbed?   

**A:**  We didn't know how it was disturbed and who did it. The documents reached the government Tsondu gyendzom. At that time, all of us were astonished and all the guarantors were scared and they were saying, "Now, what shall we do? My teacher, [Ugyen la] also said, "We don't have anything to do." Tshatrutshang also said the same. I said, "Now we don't have anything to do because we got in the middle and couldn't come to the edge. Please tell the Tsondu gyendzom that I will work to the end even if I would not see the sunshine on my forehead [get imprisoned] I will file a law case. After that, I visited and contacted people hither and thither, day and night. At that time, the representative of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> was the monk from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག] A medium size khamtsen in Loseling College in Drepung Monastery.">Bombora</a> [Khamtsen] nicknamed [Western Horse] Tipijag [Tib. ཏི་པི་ཅག]. We asked for his support and I gave him a Mauser Pistol and some money. I also asked support from the Sera Me monk Chamsur [Tib. བྱམས་ཟུར]. Then I went to Drepung and asked for support from Jiso Sog [Tib. སྤྱི་སོ་སོག].   

**Q:**  He was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>, right?   

**A:**  Who knows where he was from. He was a very powerful representative in the Tsondu.   

**Q:**  How did he come to the Tsondu? I don't understand.   

**A:**  Who would know how they came there. It was not allowed not to have the representatives of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> in the Tsondu.   

**Q:**  Only the abbots were there, not the representatives.   

**A:**  If they didn't send representatives, they wouldn't trust the abbots so later they send the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and those better off monks as the representatives. They sent two representatives in addition to the abbots and they attended all the Tsondu gyendzom meetings of the government. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> case came to the assembly, Tipijag was very verbally powerful at the meeting and said, "Ah! What the hell are you doing? There has been a lot of talk about Pandatsang. Didn't the Kashag start investigating this like the proverb, "Braiding the hair from the beginning, "[Tib. མགོ་ལྷས་མ་བསླས]. Shouldn't the Kashag conclude it. What is there to blame on the Tsondu. We didn't have anything to do to meddle into this. Aren't you doing things according to rules and customs? Is Pandatsang a foreigner or a subject of the Tibetan Government, or was it above the government? You surrounded their house and did something that was never done in our customs. Whose custom was this? If you were going to act according to the custom of the Tibetan Government, you should seal the doors and arrest the people. Who made this custom of sending soldiers. This is a disgrace for the government. We don't need this. Hand over the case to the Kashag, they have started the case and they will conclude it no matter if it will be well done or not. If the case is not settled, the assembly will investigate it. Do you agree with this? It was decided like this right away and a document was handed over to the Kashag. Then my case was solved by asking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> to give us his major support. I am grateful to him and he was a person who could take care of everybody. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was finished. That's how Panda event was settled and there weren't any exaggerations. There is one word to tell in detail, but I am not going to tell it to anyone. Then they removed the seal from the Panda house and at that time I took out all the weapons from Pandatsang and showed the government. Altogether, there were over hundred rifles and pistols. I handed them over and stored them in the Secretariat of the Seventh rank secretaries in the Kashag (Tib. the Kashag Shö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a> [བཀའ་ཤག་ཤོད་འགག]). I put the numbers on the guns and put my seal on the guns saying that this is the means for clearing the government trade. Later, by the grace of Nyimala, Pandatsang could clear all the accounts of the government trade and there were many approvals [Tib. དག་མཆན] from the 13th Dalai Lama indicating the accounts were cleared.   

**Q:**  Later, did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> replace the things that they had robbed from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  What was there to be replaced? There was nothing to replace. Tobgye ran away taking the soldiers to place called Pokhog and surrendered to the Chinese. At that time we sent Changling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> [Tib. བྱང་གླིང་ཇོ་ལགས] with 6 servants to talk with Tobgye.   

**Q:**  Did you send him?   

**A:**  Yes. I was among the people who sent him. When Changling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> came back, he told Yamphel the internal talk of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>. At that time, they had the power in their hands. After that, Panda Yamphel requested for the Third Rank title, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, that they stay in Lhasa. At that time, I was not involved with them. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> did something disgraceful.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  They implied that they were going to come to [help Panda], but at the critical point, they left us in the lurch [Tib. ཀོ་ཐག་གློད]. At that time, the monk of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> was also scared and said, "If <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> would not come, what shall we do?" I told him, "There is no problem. Internally, we have made all the calculations for clearing the accounting. You have a priest-patron relation with Panda. If Sera Me becomes responsibility for clearing the accounting of the government trade, I will bear the responsibility." He was scared, so I swear by the Buddha's Statue and I had to bribe him with 20 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> before he accepted.   

**Q:**  You must have bribed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> very greatly?   

**A:**  Oh! This person is worth taking refuge [Tib. སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆི] in. He is a person who goes from here to there [Tib. 'di nas phyin nas 'dir 'gro mkahn cig yod red] [means that he would conclude whatever he started]. I swear by the Buddha's statue that there would not be a leader like him.   

**Q:**  Didn't he take any bribe?   

**A:**  He took a little bit.   

**Q:**  There was a song sung at that time with the wording: "A golden arrow was shot from the golden household <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> and it landed on the roof of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>" [Tib. gser khyim spom mda' tshang nas/ gser gyi mda' mo btang song/ sa dbang khri smon thog khar/ 'jag sgra brgyabs nas bab song/   

**A:**  They just said that. Actually, nobody knew how much <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> bribed Trimön. The lay official Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམས་པ] was with me when I went to visit Trimön. The two of us bribed him with a little over 100 dotse. Then when we started to leave, I still had the main stuff [Tib. ཏིག་ཏིག] in my pouch so I told Göshampa, "Please wait here for a moment. I have to report something regarding the Labrang." Then I went in and left the main stuff in between his table and told him, "This is a small gift so as not to come empty-handed." [Tib. སྟོང་པ་མིན་ཙམ]. He said, "You Chandzöla don't worry." And then it was finished. Göshampa didn't even know this. Like this, I worked for Panda so Panda was grateful to me. But after I came here [India], Yamphel treated me like this [probably showing his small finger to indicate very bad]. As for what they promised me. one day Nyimala called Sonamla and Yamphel and his wife Tashi Yangdzom and my wife Chime. All of us gathered and he also called Changling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a>. In the Pandatsang household, there were followers of two different Buddhist sects; Nyima, Chime and Tashi Yangdzom were Yellow Hat (Tib. གེལུག [དགེ་ལུགས]) while Yamphel, Sonamla and Jangling Jola were Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ]. When all of us were sitting in a line, Nyimala made all of them swear;. Yamphel, Sonamla and Changling Jola swore by Padmasambhava [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] saying that they will treat me well and serve me well. Nyima, my late wife Chime, and Tashi Yandzom swore by Phabongka Lama that they will treat me well. That's what happened. All the old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and lay officials knew about this. The ordinary people didn't know. I worked very hard for Panda, but that was finished and everything passed. ... [unclear section]   

**Q:**  Now, I have a second question to ask you. At the time of the Reting regency, Phabongka Lama went to Kham, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was talk about the Panchen Lama coming back to Tibet, right?   

**A:**  No. In the meantime, Reting was appointed as the Regent. When Phabongka Lama was staying in Kham, the Panchen Lama came up. At that time, when our Lama [Phabongka] was in Chamdo, Dzasa Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] and those people came down.   

**Q:**  At that time, Yuthok was the Doji, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the other Doji was called Serdrang Tshenlela [Tib.? mtshan legs lagsi] [who was from Lharigo (Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ)].   

**Q:**  At that time, Phabongka took great care to allow the Panchen Lama to come back. How did that happen?   

**A:**  At the beginning, there had been instigation between the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  This was at the time of Lungshar. It was the root of the matter, right?   

**A:**  After that, when our Lama went to Kham, the Panchen Lama came there, but the government didn't let him come up [to Tibet]. At that time, the Panchen Lama brought Chinese with him.   

**Q:**  That was the 500 bodyguards, right?   

**A:**  There weren't many soldiers. It was a lie. How could there be 500 soldiers. There were only a little over 200 people and the leader was Je Chuzhang [Ch. je chu zhang] [Che Jigme] They were not kind of soldiers. Those Chinese children were just offered to the Panchen Lama for going to Tibet as a tour [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར] and if he wanted to keep them in Tibet, he could. If he didn't want to, he could send them back. The Panchen Lama was supposed to come back and clear up paying the one fourth military salary [Tib. དམག་ཕོགས་བཞི་ཟུར] and he was going to stay there quietly. But the government didn't know that and they had unnecessary suspicions. At that time, the Joint Dzasa Governor of Kham purposely sent our Lama to Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ] to tell the Panchen Lama to come up, but not to bring the Chinese with him.   

**Q:**  Did the Joint Dzasa tell him to come up [to Tibet]?   

**A:**  Yes, they got the order from the Kashag and they did that.   

**Q:**  I thought that the Panchen Lama himself told Phabongka Lama [to help].   

**A:**  No, he didn't have anything to do with it. The government sent our Lama. Otherwise, how could we go there? We were not allowed to go. At that time, there were 50 monks and 50 lay high quality secret bodyguards and we borrowed 100 English 303 Carbines. They were dressed like soldiers carrying their packs and we escorted our Lama up to Jyekundo. We sent a report through a messenger to the Panchen Lama that we are coming to see him. After that, the Panchen Lama sent 3 Chinese soldiers to invite us and to arrange our accommodations. Our Lama went through Nangchen and crossed the Rongpo Shangla mountain pass and reached Pathang and then he went to Jyekundo. Pathang belonged to Draupön [Tib. གྲའུ་དཔོན]. The mountain pass was a very bad one and our Lama had a very hard time when crossing it. But by the grace of Reting Regent, our Lama got permission to travel in a palanquin. There were ten people carrying the palanquin and they had 10 corvee horses. Reting had issued a permanent certificate on which it was written, "All the respective local county leaders [Tib. ས་གནས་སྣེ་སྡོད] should arrange the accommodations voluntarily for the Phabongka Lama who will travel whatever convenient route he would take whether via the southern or the northern route where he will give dharma teachings for the sake of the Buddhism." So when the weather was very cold, he sat in the palanquin. Otherwise, he rode on a horse. When he arrived at Jyekundo, the abbot Mayong Khembo Thöndrub [Tib. [?] mkhan po don grub] as the representative of the Three Big Monastic Seats and Doring Theiji [Tib. རྡོརིང་ཐའི་ཇི] as the representative of the Tibetan Government had arrived there to invite the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  Do you mean Mayong Khembo who was from Sera?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was he the abbot of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨད] The Mey College of Sera Monastery.">Mey</a> [Tib. སྨད]?   

**A:**  He is from Me Mayong Khamtsen. At that time, the Panchen Lama was staying in the house called Chinese Palace [Tib. རྒྱ་ནག་ཕོ་བྲང] and we stayed in the house known to belong to Ma Jichang. We stayed there for about a month. During that time, the Panchen Tshang paid the salary for ten people of Phabongka including the Lama and his attendants. I was paid a salary equal to a fifth rank official [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] and the other attendants were paid salary equal to that of ordinary officials. They paid small pieces of Chinese silver for the salary.   

**Q:**  They paid with pure silver for your salary?   

**A:**  Yes, they weighed the silver that they paid us. After that, we talked with the Panchen Lama. The Panchen Lama said, "Please, I have 1,500 rifles called Panchen Pamaling. From this I am planning to offer 1,000 rifles for the bodyguard of the Great Abbot Vajradhara Khenchen Dojechang [Tib. མཁན་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང].   

**Q:**  This he meant for the 13th Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He said, "I am going to invite the Dalai Lama to preside at the Mönlam Festival on my way back and I am going to be the sponsor and give alms to the monks and I am going to offer the rifles to him. I have prepared such gifts from China for many. I have already made paper packages of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> and I am going to give 15 dayan for each of the monks of the Sera, Drepung and Ganden." I saw that the dayan were packed in boxes. But the monks didn't have the merit to get that. At the Tsondu, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] fought seriously and the Panchen Lama wasn't allowed to come up. Otherwise all of the properties of the Panchen Tshang would have reached Tibet and since it had reached Tibet, it would be in the hands of the government.   

**Q:**  Did their property reach Tibet?   

**A:**  No, it didn't. The root cause was this. Otherwise, the Panchen Lama would have come back and invite the Dalai Lama to the Mönlam Assembly.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama wasn't there, right?   

**A:**  If he would have been there, this was their preparation. Later, the Dalai Lama didn't live so they didn't have any thing to do except to just to stay there. Because they didn't let the Panchen Lama in, he passed away down there. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> was unable to do any harm to the Tibetan Government. They couldn't even fart [Tib. རྟུག་དྲི] towards them. The Tibetan Government just blew away the properties of the Panchen Lama whose property was going to come into the hands of the government and the Three Big Monastic Seats. Then everything was finished.   

**Q:**  While Phabongka was down there, the matter was decided, right?   

**A:**  Yes, everything was finished then.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did the Panchen Lama say? He wrote a lot of letters to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  He submitted reports to Lhasa and also to the Doji. He was hoping that the matter would be settled.   

**Q:**  He also wrote a lot of letters to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> with whom he had the dharma relations.   

**A:**  They also sent an "arrow" letter [Tib. མདའ་ཡིག]. Because the officials of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> were really arrogant and they sent a very bad arrow letter in which it was written, "All of the counties, dzongs and estates [Tib. རྫོང་གཞིས] located on the route from Jyekundo up to the Tashilhunpo nation, should bear [the contents of the dayik] in your mind." [Tib. སྐྱེ་མདོ་ནས་བཀྲས་ལྷུན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཕྱིན་ལམ་འཁེལ་རྫོང་གཞིས་རྣམས་ནས་ངེས་དགོས]. Since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> of the Tibetan Government were malicious [Tib. གནག་པོ] they said, "What the hell are they talking about a Tashilhunpo "nation." They are really spoiled!   

**Q:**  Yes, I heard that the arrow latter was wrapped in yellow brocade with a round dragon design [Tib. མཛོད་གོས]. On it was written, "You the counties, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the estates located on the route from the Jyekundo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> up to the great monastic seat <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, should bear [the contents] in your mind." right?   

**A:**  Yes, then they stopped the Panchen Lama from coming and then our Lama asked for leave from the Panchen Lama. At that time, the Panchen Lama gave me a certificate and told me, "Thank you! You were helpful to me and I don't have much to tell you. This is your certificate." He also gave me a rifle called Pamali and a trotting horse and a coral snuff box. He told me, "Please serve your Lama Vajradhara well. When I came down I got a lot of the transmission and teaching from Tibet and Amdo. So when I come to Tibet, I am going to give those to your Lama and I also have to receive some teaching from your Lama. If we don't get this chance, then I will pray to be able to do it in the future life." Then we came back and the Panchen Lama stayed in Jyekundo. After that, when we reached the Jagsamkha [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཁ] chain bridge, we met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང], and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> came to receive our Lama. Oh! my [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་པོ]. I had a such a hard time. I couldn't untie my belt for 1 month and 17 days and nights. I had to stand on guard near the tent of my Lama day and night holding a Mauser Pistol and wearing the fur <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> covered with a musk deer skin. This was because my Lama had many enemies from different Buddhist sects. So I couldn't bear the responsibility. When we reached the Jagsamkha chain bridge, I fell asleep day and night. When I was eating food, I found that in between my belts, there were so many lice and nits. I suffered like this. I had been serving for three incarnations of my Lamas. At that time, I never acted two faced between the Tibetan Government and the Tashilhunpo. I had been thinking of the Tibetan Government and served it sincerely. [Note: When the 13 Dalai Lama was alive Phabongka, who was considered one of the most brilliant lamas of his generation went to give teaching in Kham. However, he was extremely pro- Gelugpa and anti-Nyingmapa and did things in Kham like throwing statues of Padmasambhava (Guru Rimpoche) in the river. He wanted to see the Nyingma monasteries eliminated. He was also an extreme proponent of the worship of Sungden. His actions were so extreme that the 13th Dalai Lama actually banned him from giving teaching after that. However, when the Dalai Lama died, he again gave teaching everywhere. The 14th Dalai Lama's famous tutor, Trijang Rimpoche, was his main disciple, and also propagated the worship of Shungden to his disciples.]   

**Q:**  What was the main reason for Reting to resign?   

**A:**  He was kind of not serious [Tib. ཆོ་མེད་པ]. Reting was young and he was staying idle [Tib. ད་ག་སེ] in between   

**Q:**  He was just playing around, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was just thinking of enjoying himself. Otherwise, there was nothing. There wasn't anybody bossing him around [Tib. དབང་ཤོད་མཁན]. There was nobody going above Reting Rimpoche. At that time, Reting sent a message written on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</a> to our Lama. It said, "I want to stay in a hermitage for a while. So please replace me as the Regent for 1-2 years." At that time, our Lama asked me, "What shall we do? Kungö Dzasa came here and I received the message telling be that I have to be the acting Regent. If I would be the acting Regent, you will become the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>. What are you going to do? Think about it." Then I told him, "Please let me think about it tonight. Please write the answer tomorrow. Since, this matter is too big I can't make the decision right away." Then my Lama told the dzasa to come tomorrow and we will give you the answer. I couldn't fall asleep for the whole night. What should I do? Shall we become the Regent or shall we just do our work. When I thought about one side, I thought it would be very good to become a Regent because I would have the power and I could make Phabongka as I wished. When I thought from the other side, I thought, Oh! There wasn't anybody among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and lay officials and the monks in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> who were not disciple of Phabongka. If we became the Regent, we won't be able to fulfilll their wishes. If we couldn't fulfilll their wishes, there would be ill feelings [Tib. དམ་ཚིག] between the Lama and his disciples and this would be a disaster [Tib. དཔེ་བསག་གི་རེད]. I thought this wouldn't be good. I thought about this many times and the next morning I took an mandala offering [Tib. རྟེན་གསུམ] and went to see our Lama and I told him, "Please ask to be allowed to decline becoming the Regent. You don't need to become a Regent. What we have now is enough. I don't want to become a dzasa. Please stay as we are. This is like the proverb, "A pine tree is the most appropriate and nice looking place for the magpie." [Tib. སྐྱ་ག་ལ་མཛེས་པ། ཐང་ཤིང་ལ་སྤམ་པ]. If you become the Regent, it will be a disaster. You, Rimpoche won't be able to fulfill their wishes, so the lama and the disciple will become unfriendly [Tib. དམ་ཚིག་ཤོར] and I won't be able to serve you. So and so will come to ask you for titles and will bring money. So in the future, it will become very bad. I know about this." When I gave up and told our Lama about this, at first he said, "You are really silly. You don't have the courage to handle it when you've got it in your hand." I thought that he was showing an expression of dislike. I said, "Now, I don't have anything to do. I thought about it when sleeping and sitting and I thought it would be better not to do it and I made the decision.' Actually, after 2-3 days he was extremely glad for what I did and he said, "You are a real man. You should think in that way. When you were saying that you have to give up the eight worldly concerns; [Tib. འཇིག་རྟེན་ཆོས་བརྒྱད]; to profit and to lose, to hear pleasant and unpleasant things, to be flattered and be ridiculed, to be happy and unhappy], what are going to give up? Some of the monks couldn't dare to give up their three kinds of monks dresses and you gave up the government political power. If this is not venerable, who is venerable? You are great!" He praised me a lot. Since then, he had great affection FOR me and I had very deep faith towards him from the bottom of my heart. Before he died, he left his last will saying that I was like his only son, helping him like a walking stick [Tib. བུ་གཅིག་བུ་འདི་སྙིང་གི་ཚིལ་ལྟ་བུ། རྒས་པོའི་ལག་གི་འཁར་རྟེན་འདི་གཅིག་པུ]. This was written in his complete literary works [Tib. གསུང་འབུམ]. We didn't become the Regent and we lived happily. Now I don't have any salary from the Tibetan Government and I never took a single coin of money from the Guomindang. After our Lama passed away, all of us became poor, but I stood up on my own walking stick and built the houses of the Labrang much better than before. I bought an estate called Phuma Bartsho [Tib. ཕུ་མ་བར་ཚོ] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and paid 40,000 dotse. But later I lost it. Since the entire political system and Buddhism was lost, it doesn't matter for me.   

**Q:**  Basically, this is the natural law of samsara or cyclical existence [Tib. འཁོར་བའི་ཆོས་ཉིད].   

**A:**  If I tell you internally, I have three points to tell you. At the beginning, I went to Kham, China and Yunnan Sadam and then I came back to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you go there on an official tour or for trade?   

**A:**  When Chairman Liu [Tib. ལིཨུ་ཞུཞི] invited us and when the Joint Dzasa were on the other side of the river [in Chamdo], a single person or a single horse of the government was not allowed to go there. Since I was called by Chairman Liu, I was allowed to go there. At that time, Dzasa Yuthok trusted me and I became an intelligence agent of the Tibetan Government. Yuthok surreptitiously gave me 100 travel documents for the pony express [Tib. རྟ་ཤད་ལམ་ཡིག]. So I went there pretending I was not doing anything. When I got to the border, I surveyed how many Chinese soldiers were there and sent the information back through the pony express. Then I went to Jyekundo and went to the place of the Triu Khambas. I sent reports wherever I arrived. At the time of my coming back, there were 13 travel document for the pony express was left. I worked a little bit for the government, but other people didn't know about this. Only the Joint Dzasa knew about this. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> knew about that. Mondrong [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོང] and Rimshi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] The name of the aristocratic family of an important government official.">Trogawa</a> [Tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བོ] knew that. After I came back, the Gyalama Champa Gyurme [Tib. རྒྱ་བླ་མ་བྱམས་པ་འགྱུར་མེད] came to me and told me, "You Chandzö! Do not stay like this being dull-headed. You should stay under the leadership of the CCP. You should ask for a title and ask for a title for the incarnate Lama [Tib. མཆོག་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. I will make it so that you will get 1,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> a month as salary. If you stay dull-headed, you will suffer a loss." Champa Gyurme was one of the main Communist Party members, but he had been in Drepung as a spy and he had also received teachings from our Lama. He had a kind of faith towards our Lama. He was a strange person. I told him, "Thank you very much for telling me this. I am grateful to you." But, I didn't give him an answer and I didn't receive a single coin from the Chinese. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Lhalu was appointed as the Governor of Kham and I came to Kham.   

**Q:**  At that time your Lama was not there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I came to Kham and I became the military officer called Tog Magpön [Tib. tog dmamg dpon]. In the past, the personal attendant of the Dalai Lama, Kujar [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར] had that position and it was also the salary position [Tib. ཐབ་རྟེན] of the Doji. I took this as a lease from Lhalu. I worked as the military officer of the soldiers and I stayed 4 years in Tsawarong in Kham. During Lhalu's term, I stayed there and collected the custom taxes. At that time, the Tadang Depön [Tib. ཏ་དང་མདའ་དཔོན], Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས], surrendered to the Chinese along with his soldiers. He was told that the Chinese would give him the position of commander and 1000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> as salary. So he surrendered. Similarly, the Chinese also sent me a letter saying, "You are the Tog Magpön stationed at the border. You should surrender with your soldiers. We will pay 1,000 dayan per month and we also will give you the soldiers and you will be the depön. I sent a letter saying, "You eat a big shit! When I came from Lhasa, I touched my forehead to the Buddha's statue in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and I swore that I will never surrender to you, the enemy of religion." I also wrote a report to the Kashag in Chamdo [Tib. མདོ་སྨད་བཀའ་ཤག] saying that I didn't surrender to the Chinese and didn't take their salary." Until I came back, I didn't let a single Chinese pass by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚྭ་བ] A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tshawa</a> custom station. It was not because I had a large number of soldiers that I stopped them. I used a method. I caught 3-4 [Chinese] spies among the Khambas. One of them was called Natsha Anphel. One was called Trayushang and there were two others. I kept them like under house arrest and made them work for me. The handwriting of one of them was very good. Actually, I handed them over to my soldiers and didn't let them go. Since they couldn't send the information, the [Chinese] soldiers couldn't come. After that, my term was over and they left Yongdrung Sonam Tsering [Tib. གྱོང་དྲུང་བསོད་ནམས] as the replacement and it was time of the Ngabö. At that time, the monk official Shartse la [Tib. shat rtse lags] who is here, was the Sangna Chödzong [Tib. གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་རྫོང] and there was a monk official who was the same household with the Drunyichemmo Ngagpa La [Tib. སྔགས་པ་ལགས]. I saved him from losing his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> position. He was so scared and was going to run away. I told him, "You don't need to run away. It doesn't matter. I won't hand you over to the Chinese. You just stay here." Ngagpa-la was my friend. They were really stupid. When I was stopping the Chinese in an imposing manner and collecting the custom taxes from the travelers I was named Bala, one of the heroes in the Gesar Story. And I named my white horse Tore, the name of Bala's horse and I named my sword Lebchen, the name of Bala's sword, because I didn't surrender to the Chinese. In the end I came to Lhasa and at the time of the Tibetan New Year, the revolt took place and I didn't have any thing to do. All the people were nervous and there was the Chushigandru. I sent letters to Andru Dzasa] back and forth and I got involved in that. I distributed 5,000-6,000 protective talisman - the statue of Tsongkhapa. Then I went out from Lhasa. Andru Ngawang Tsering [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ངག་དབང་ཚེ་རིང] knows about this because I handed over the protective talisman to him. I was from Central Tibet, but I was involved in Chushigandru. When the Dalai Lama took the temporal and religious power, even though he was as small as a thumb, he talked as big as a mountain. I was surprised. Once, he gave an instruction after giving an Avalokitsevara Initiation [Tib. ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོའི་དབང་ཆེན]. The Chinese knew that and put it in the newspaper. It was written, "The Chinese are not our lords [Tib. དཔོན་པོ], they are our servants. If the Chinese behave well and stay here, they are for helping us. So you have to be friendly and treat them nicely. If the Chinese don't behave well, is was according to their wish and we are separate." The Dalai Lama was so brave even when he was so young. I thought this was great and I took the newspaper to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and reported to the Dalai Lama through the Drönyerchemmo. I said, "Please check if there is any exaggeration in this." The Drönyerchemmo reported and said that there was no exaggeration. Then I said, "If there was no exaggeration, would be okay to print it on the printing block. Since I had a lot of money, I called the printers and in 3-4 days, I printed 5,000 copies and distributed in the four directions of Lhasa City. When I got to India I didn't have that instruction and nobody had that. There was only one which was brought by a monk from Tashilhunpo. I distributed it in Western Tibet and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of the Shelkar Chöde [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ]. After I came here (India), I put it in the Freedom Newspaper [Tib. རང་དབང་གསར་ཤོག]. I kept it and tried to translate it into English and I told Tharchin Babu, but nobody could translate it. This year, when the Dalai Lama came I reported to him and showed him the instruction and he told me that this is worthy to translate into English and he gave it to the Religious Office. At that time, there was a Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ] Lama working in the religious office.   

**Q:**  He was Khamtrül.   

**A:**  He said that this instruction was already printed. So I am returning the manuscript to you.   

**Q:**  Give it to me, I will do it.   

**A:**  Can you do that?   

**Q:**  There is no problem.   

**A:**  Probably, Samdong [Tib. ཟམ་གདོང] might be better. Please talk with him.   

**Q:**  We can do it together.   

**A:**  You should translate it into English without leaving out a single word.   

