# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0211.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Phabongka Chandzö [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ་ཕྱག་མཛོད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Phabongka Chandzö [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ་ཕྱག་མཛོད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 67  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Phabongka [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] was the chandzö for the famous Phabongka Rimpoche. In this interview, he tells about joining the 1959 revolt in Norbulinga and about the Lungshar and Trimön incidents. He also discusses how Sera Me rebelled against Reting over the appointment of the Töpa abbot. Then he talks about how the Chinese Liu Zhuxi kept most of the wealth of the Panchen Lama and later lost it to the Chinese. The subject also talks about how Panda Tobgye helped him a lot when he went to Kham and about Geshe Sherab Gyatso and his student Gendün Chönphel.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0211_02/H_0211_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Finally the fighting took place in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. Then I sent our Rimpoche [Phabongka Lama] and my wife and children to the Phabongka Hermitage. I went with about 10 servants. Each took a rifle and a pistol. I took my own food and stayed in Norbulinga supposed to be a bodyguard [Tib. ཡིན་པའི་ཁུལ]. The assembly in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> appointed me as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of the South Gate of Norbulinga so I stayed there. Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས] and Bodyguard Regiment's Depön, all of them know about this. I don't need to tell lies. Then the Dalai Lama went through the South Gate. I didn't let any secret leak out. We were able to bring him out stealthily. I stayed there until it became dark. In the beginning, the West Gate was lost, then the North Gate, and then the East Gate was lost. I guarded the South Gate until dark. Finally, Kündeling Dzasa was appointed as the magji, but he ran away at the first chance. [laughter] His heart was like a bird's heart. Tara la really stayed behind. He was really a sincere person and he was also brave. Although there was a difference like earth and sky in terms of handwriting and math between Tarala and me, but in terms of loyalty, there wasn't any difference between us. When I was in Norbulinga, I was protected against weapons and even a needle didn't hurt me [Tib. མཚོན་འགྲོ་གི་མི་འདུག] [because of having talisman]. At that time he [Tarala] was the chief [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པ] of the North Gate. Before that, the trader Jangtshatsang [Tib. འཇང་ཚ་ཚང] was the Chief. But, he was coming holding a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> on a stick. I got so angry. I thought it would be better to die rather than surrender. Then I took out my Mauser Pistol and told him, "Where are you going? Kneel down! He kneeled down and folded the khata back. He knew that I was protected against the weapons. If he shot me, I won't get hit and I could shoot him on his forehead. I asked, "What are you going to do? He said, "I was thinking of surrendering." I said, "Forget about it and go away." He replied, "Yes." And he put the khata scarf in his amdra. I thought if I killed him, I would be bullying him so I spared him. Then I went to Gyamtsoling [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་གླིང] who was my brother-in-law and a Tsenshab. I could have killed him, but I didn't dare to kill him. He gave me a gold biscuit, but I didn't accept it and I came back. After that, I came to Misamari in [Assam] India. I met the Dalai Lama in Mussoorie and reported what had happened in Lhasa. The Chinese told me three times to surrender and they said they will pay me a box of the 1,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>, but I didn't. Like this, I served for the politics and the religion [the Tibetan polity]. I am not making a big deal of it and I will never ask for a position[ Regarding who served the politics and religion [system] in Tibet, the village and monastery of Rongpo Rabtengön {Tib. rong po rab brtan dgon] had served greatly militarily. Karupön [Tib. ཀ་རུ་དཔོན] from Khyungpo also served well. Among them, the magji was the trader Tendzin Namdröl [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་རྣམ་གྲོལ]. The son of Rongpopön [Tib. རོང་པོ་དཔོན] called Namsebu Gangkyi [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་བུ་གང་སྐྱིད] came to Dalhousie in India and died. This monastery and the village worked very hard. All of their property was used for the soldiers and military. Tendzin Namdröl was the magji. He he had two brothers called Ngawang Phüljung [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཕུལ་བྱུང] and Ngawang Wöser [Tib. ངག་དབང་འོད་ཟེར]. There was also monk of Rabten Monastery who was a servant of our Labrang called Tshültrim [Tib. ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས]. I swear by the three jewels that this person was so brave and he fought so fiercely [with the Chinese] that if it would be in India, we would have to build a golden stupa for him and prostrate every day. He killed 70-80 Chinese by himself in one day. If he had led his soldiers and taken the weapons, he would have become stronger than the Chushigandru. But he led his men and went to the north and killed many Chinese. Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ] people also surrendered to him and he gathered people and fought with the Chinese and killed several thousands of Chinese. He was always protected against weapon [by blessed amulets]. The Chinese [finally] arrested and executed him. Now over here, only Tendzin Namdröl and a few people from Rongpo are left. The monastery and villagers of Sog Tsendengön [Tib. སོག་ཙན་དན་དགོན] who also served the Tibetan Government very well. There isn't anybody in India who made a greater accomplishment fighting than the Rongpo and Sog Tsanden Monasteries and villagers. [In Tibet] Tendzin Namdröl arrested one of his family members who was a monk and also a Chinese spy. When other people said that he should be killed. Tendzin Namdrol said, " Don't kill him because he is a monk." and he gouged out his eyeballs. He is still alive with blind eyes and he is telling people that Tendzin Namdröl gouged my eyes. The Chinese are making publicity about this. The Chinese killed Tsültrim and completely destroyed Rongpo Rabten Monastery and village. The Chinese regarded the Rongpo Rabten Monastery as their worse enemy among all the monasteries in Tibet. If Tibet doesn't gain independence, Rongpo Rabten Monastery won't be able to rebuild the monastery.   

**Q:**  This is very important for us to know.   

**A:**  Yes, if you know the facts, you should think about this. As for the Derge people, they sided with the Tibetan Government when it had a high position and they sided the Chinese when the Chinese had a high position [Tib. རྒྱ་མགོ་མཐོ་ན་རྒྱ་མགོ། བོད་མགོ་མཐོ་ན་བོད་མགོ]. As for me, my accomplishment is that I didn't surrender to the Guomindang and have not received a single <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> of salary from Guomindang and the Chinese Communists. I became a beggar in India, but the Tibetan Government didn't give me anything. I didn't have anything to eat, but I stood up on my own walking stick and made my living. I am going to take refuge in the Dalai Lama for this life and future lives. I am only angry with the subordinate officials because they did those things. I am not angry with the Dalai Lama and Gyalo Thondup and anybody else. Now, Gyalo Thondup was the one who was doing the work and working hard, but people are complaining against him. All people should think carefully. I think it is better not to complain against him, because since he is the older brother of the Dalai Lama. I think he would never let the Dalai Lama down. I am not saying that because I have surrendered to Gyalo Thondup and I swear by all the Buddhas and the Boddhisatwas in the ten directions [Tib. ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་བཅས] that I am not afraid of him. I think in the future, the Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ] in Kalimpong and Dharamsala should do whatever the Dalai Lama tells them to do and should stop people from being biased between the religious sects and the regions [Tib. ཆོལ་ཁ] and among the government and the people. This is the worse thing. The youth should remain in the middle and whoever is being biased they should regard him as a spy and oppose him. If they could do that and make solidarity among the three provinces, they would serve the Dalai Lama. This is my last will. The youth are insulting the monk and lay officials. You should not do this at all because their original lineage is from the ancient 6 lineage [Tib. མིའུ་གདུང་དྲུག] who were all related to the Avalokitaswara. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] were from the 6 lineage and Thönba [Tib. ཐོན་པ] is the lineage of the Minister Thönme Sambhotra [Tib. ཐོན་མི་སམ་བྷོ་ཏྲ]. Phala [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ] is from the lineage Miwang Pholha [Tib. མི་དབང་ཕོ་ལྷ]. Horkhang is the lineage from the Horgurkar [Tib. ཧོར་གུར་དཀར] in the Gesar Story. So those officials have different ways of talking and they are more knowledgeable. Later, some of them acted like kings and some of them acted like devils, and some of them acted like instigators. Anyway, they ruled the government.   

**Q:**  Who was the Töpa Khembo Dromdö Chöndze [Tib. stod pa mkhan po 'brom stod chos mzdad] who acted strongly in favor of Reting during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> [Tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] affair?   

**A:**  He was called Dromdö Chöndze because he was born in a place called Dromdö [Tib. འབྲོམ་སྟོད] near Lhasa. He was from the household called Dromdö Jisur [Tib. སྤྱི་ཟུར] and he was in Yerpa Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  What was his real name?   

**A:**  I forgot it   

**Q:**  Why did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] resign? Later he acted kind of insane and wore a white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] The lower part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">shamtab</a> and went around the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street, right?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was knowledgeable and very well informed. The government of Tibet had 3 well known Kudrak, the Sheshöl Changsum [Tib. བཤད་ཞོལ་ཆང་གསུམ]: <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ] A Tibetan aristocratic family.">Changkyim</a> [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ]. Below them among the shape, Trimön was one of the top. You know why he is called Trimön?   

**Q:**  No.   

**A:**  One of their great grandfathers was supposed to have said that I don't admire [Tib. སྨོན] 10,000 [Tib. ཁྲི] soldiers, because I myself am braver than that. Most of the lineage was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] family. They have many sons and of them became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> in the Namgye Tratsang.   

**Q:**  He was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> Chöndze, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And there was also a monk in the Tsethang [Tib. rsted thang] Khamtsen, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and there was one also in Sera. After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön's wife died, he remarried the wife of Derge Theiji [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་ཐའི་ཇི] called Derge Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ]. His religious sect was Nyingma. I don't know what happened to him. He became mental unstable. He acted like a Siddha [Tib. གྲུབ་ཆེན]. His wife's name was Doyang-la [Tib. རྡོ་གཡང་ལགས]. Later I went to see him and at that time he was calling his wife, "Doyang-la, Doyang-la, Chandzö-la has come, make a good tea." At that time, he was kind of insane.   

**Q:**  At that time he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>; it was before he resigned, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Probably, he didn't have any choice but to act like this, right?   

**A:**  When he was kind of insane, he granted his resignation.   

**Q:**  When he resigned, he was also given an estate as the award, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did Dromdö Chöndze become the Töpa Khembo? Was it during Reting or 13th Dalai Lama's era?   

**A:**  I can't remember. Maybe it was during the 13th.   

**Q:**  Reting was about to appoint this Töpa Khembo as the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> but they wouldn't listen. How did that happen?   

**A:**  That was a very bad rebellion against Reting. I served Reting Rimpoche a little bit.   

**Q:**  From at the beginning, how did that happen ?   

**A:**  ????? Reting wanted to appoint somebody else as the Töpa Khembo which was against [the sitting] Töpa Khembo's will so they didn't get along well on the matter of appointing the Töpa Khembo. There we one monk called Tsha [Tib. ཚ་བ] Shegno who was a white haired man, and another called En [Tib. དབེན] Chöndze from Rongpo. These two became one party and rebelled against Reting at the time of the ex-abbot of Me [Tib. མཁན་ཟུར] nicknamed Tumpo Lumpo.   

**Q:**  Why did they do that?   

**A:**  It was about the appointment of Töpa Khembo.   

**Q:**  Who wanted to get appointed as the abbot?   

**A:**  They wanted Reting to appoint the person they wanted. But what they wanted, Reting wouldn't accept and whatever Reting wanted, they wouldn't accept. So the Me monks rebelled against Reting and wouldn't accept the person he appointed. So Reting dismissed the abbot of Me and removed his monk's yellow shawl, chögö [Tib. ཆོས་གོས]. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> was ready to rebel against Reting. At that time, our Lama Dorjechang [Phabongka] sent a letter to me which said, "There is a prophecy saying, "If the goat [Reting] is ornamented with precious gems, then until the Bird Year everything will be smooth and good." [Tib. ར་ལ་རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱན་སྤྲས་ན། བྱ་ཡི་བར་དུ་བདེ་ཞིང་འཇམ]. You should serve Reting as much as you can." At that time, I thought, how the hell could I serve Reting? How could I serve him because Reting is the Regent." I can't do that. But since this was my Lama's order, I thought of doing whatever I could and I said yes. Then the disturbance started and the Tratsang Me split into two parties. One on my side, the other was on the other side. I was on the Reting side and what I did was on behalf of Phabongka because my Lama told me to serve Reting. Otherwise, Reting neither gave me a title nor did any favor for me. It reached almost to the point of warfare breaking out.   

**Q:**  Was the war about to break?   

**A:**  Yes, it was about to break out. Among those monks who were going against Reting, were Tayong Khambu Metog [Tib. [?] kham bu'i me tog], Shungpa Koben [Tib. གཞུང་པ་ཀོ་པན], the beard, Gyeyrong Chandzö Gyau [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང་ཕྱག་མཛོད་རྒྱའུ] Tsha Shelsur [Tib. ཚ་བ་ཞལ་ཟུར] and En [Tib. དབེན] Chöndze. These were the main persons who rebelled against Reting. It was almost at the point of having a physical fight. Then I invited Phabongka to personally intervene when he was giving teachings in Tsang. He stopped his teaching and personally came and intervened. Phabongka went and saw Reting. Reting was determined to demote the abbot completely, lash and expel him from the monk's order. But at the insistence of Phabongkapa, they finally agreed that he would be removed from the abbotship, but would be allowed to remain as an ex-abbot. And for the others involved, there was not a single punishment. So finally, it went in a natural manner like the proverb, "The fire went off and the smoke disappeared naturally" [Tib. མེ་རང་ཤི་དུ་བ་རང་ཡལ]. And that time they [the other group] were holding me as their personal enemy, but I was not afraid. I was a hero. They said I have a bone in my heart, I don't know whether I do or not. When I die, you people can open it and see it whether there is bone or excrement. Finally, they couldn't do anything to me. And also I got the say for the appointment of the new abbot and I got the say. It's because Phabongka came down and personally intervened and because of my own labor. So the power came to me and I kept it a secret and told no one.   

**Q:**  It must be that Reting asked the opinion of Phabongka about who would be suitable.   

**A:**  Of course. But then Phabongka asked me who would be better. Since it came to my hand, so I had to think of something from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> because I am from Gyerong. So I thought one suitable person was the old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> who later became the Dalai Lama's personal tsenshab. Then the 2nd possibility was the geshe who had a shaking head and a goiter. Then there was one man named Trimdog who later became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡེ་འཆང] A title some Labrang used for their managers/stewards.">dechang</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྨོན་གླིང] The name of a famous lama whose labrang was located in the north of Lhasa.">Tshomönling</a> [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང]. He was a nice man and we were from the same <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>. So we discussed and we decided to give the abbotship to the monk with the goiter. He had to on the condition that he keep this man Trimdog as the abbot's manager. I also had them take a pledge that they would listen to whatever Phabongka Chandzö told them to do. After they made this statement, then Reting appointed him as the abbot. After the death of Phanbogka when I was in a difficult situation, these two, the abbot and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> collaborated with some of my bad servants and they became my enemy. One day, I had to go to a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> meeting (of the tratsang) and we had a verbal quarrel and we had to shout so much that the neighboring khamtsen monks were saying the Phabongka Chandzö was yelling and screaming and was at the point of physical fighting in the main room of Sera Me. But in reality I didn't scream like that. However, I told them, "From the top, the abbot with the goiter, to everyone here, if I have to say things, I can say bad things about all of you. If you don't behave yourselves and if Phabongka didn't want it????, it would be like the proverb, "If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> offering was thrown in the river, both the dog and the bird will lose their hope." [Tib. gtor ma qu la dbyugs na/ bya khyi kho thag chod]. We have built up the Phabongka with our own hard time, there is nothing to with the Sera Me." After that, the revolt took place. After that, I visited the Drönyerchemmo Champa Tendar [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར] who later worked as the Noryön in TashiLhunpo for a long time.   

**Q:**  Was he the one who went to Kham and became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama?   

**A:**  Yes. He was the Drönyerchemmo after Kogpa [Tib. ?] and lived in Torgya Linga [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག་གླིང་ག] (the who died during the Künphela trouble).I took a scarf and a Mendredensum and told him, "I would like to offer all the property of Phabongka to the Dalai Lama." The Drönyerchemmo said, "Please don't do this." Then I told him. "I am just kidding. These people are making a lot of trouble for me. If they didn't make trouble and bully me, then I would have nothing to say. Then the Drönyerchemmo was laughing.   

**Q:**  I heard that when Reting took over the regency, he also asked the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> abbot to resign and he appointed the Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁམས་པ]. Is that true?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  After the death of the Panchen Lama, some people brought the body to Tibet and some chose to go to China, how did that happen. Did they have an internal fight or what?   

**A:**  I don't know whether they had internal fight, but the important people were 1. Ngagchen Khen Rimpoche [Tib. སྔགས་ཆེན་མཁན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ], 2. Drunyichemmo Dangchenpa [Tib. གདངས་ཆེན་པ] 3. Dzasa Serkhang [Tib. ཛ་སག་སེར་ཁང] and 4.Gyangchöpa. These were on one side. On the other side were 1. Jei Chuzhang [Ch. qu zhang] and 2. Dzasa Trendonga [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང་པ]. The Trehor <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> married the female chief called Khangsar Pönmo [Tib. ཁང་གསར་དཔོན་མོ] and stayed down there and try to pull the [body] down and others tried to pull it up. They didn't get along this matter. ???? In short whatever a little bit property, money, etc, they got personally I don't know. Most of the money etc. was taken by the Khambas. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> people didn't get anything from the Panchen Lama's wealth. The major portion of the wealth went to the Chairman, Liu Zhuxi.   

**Q:**  Was this the same Chinese officer who was supposed to be the follower of Phabongka?   

**A:**  This was Liu Zhuxi. According to Phabongka, this Liu Zhuxi was definitely a reincarnation of a Tibetan Lama who was from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> area. At the time of his death, he got the wrong calculation of his birth data and was born in China. Whatever it was, he was a devoted to Gelugpa Buddhism and used to say the prayers of Yamantaka (Tib. ཇིགཇེ [འཇིགས་བྱེད་དཔའ་ཅིག]). All the prayers that he said were in the Tibetan language, yet he didn't speak Tibetan. He was a high leader in China who smoke opium. He was fantastic and incredibly rich. Most of the important and precious articles (of the Panchen Lama) were in his hands. He was planning to hand them over to the next Panchen Lama and he kept them in a house. For example, according to some traders I knew, they saw some thankas made out of antic brocade where the linings were pearls (real pearls). That was the complete set of the life story of the Buddha [Tib. མཛད་བརྒྱ་དགག་བསམ་ཁྲི་ཤིང]. This was one of the things the Panchen Lama had and it was such a precious thing that it could not be found all over the world. Finally, after Liu was destroyed, all of these things were taken by the Communist Chinese. This Chinese was a follower of Phabongka. Phabongka sent one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> from Sera known as Geshe Garabla [Tib. དགའ་རབ་ལགས] to be his teacher. He went there and stayed many years. After the death of Phabongka, I received an invitation from Liu Zhuxi which actually came from that Geshe. They looked after me very well and gave me a lot of gifts for the Phabongka Labrang like 500-600 loads of tea leaves. We didn't do anything between China and Tibet. Then I met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] at Dartsedo. He was very nice and he helped me a great deal. He came to receive me with about 50 riders and he gave me parties after I arrived there. But he didn't get along well with Liu, so I didn't dare to keep much contact with Tobgye because of Liu. Tobgye was a very proud man and very short-tempered, very brave and fearless also. Tobgye did not surrender to the Chinese and he was not really under the Tibetans. So he did not bow to anyone. He kept his own soldiers (about 500-600) and stayed in Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ]. They were known as the Panda Tobgye Shoga (group). He stayed like that until the Communist Chinese took over and handled him.   

**Q:**  After the 13th Dalai Lama's death, some Chinese called something like Chen Chuzhang or Kong Chuzhang came on the pretext of making offerings to the monastery and giving alms, etc, right?   

**A:**  I don't know anything. I heard they made offerings, but I don't know exactly what happened.   

**Q:**  They've set up some English schools in Tibet and they also played soccer and there were strong objections made by the abbots and finally they had to close it down. Can you tell me how that happened?   

**A:**  They were about to start the school but later they could not continue. If they could have continued, it would have been good for Tibetans, but they could not.   

**Q:**  I heard it was stopped by the abbots of Sendregasum. What do you say about that?   

**A:**  The blame was put on the abbots, but actually what could the abbots do. You and I know that very well. The abbots would not be able to act on anything unless some powerful or trusted government officials influenced them. That was the everyday situation in how the Assembly worked. Normally the abbots were influenced by the lay officials and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, but sometimes the abbots influenced the officials. Who knows? The most powerful person at that time was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and before that, there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> and others. Whose friend was whom and who influenced whom I don't know. As far as I am concerned, I did the position of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེད་གཏོང་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པ] The monk in charge of alms.">Gyeytong Jigyaba</a> [person in charge of alms] for many years and I even did that during Mönlam for 15 years. At that time, if I wasn't there they almost wouldn't know how to distribute the alms shares. When I was there, I gave the instructions on giving the extra alms shares to the monastic officials like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a>, etc., because I verbally could recite by heart the list of the alms shares.   

**Q:**  With regard to the Lhundrup Dzong affair, the Drunyichemmo claimed his brother was killed and some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> people said that he wasn't killed, but just pretended to be dead and later he died in Lhasa. What was really true?   

**A:**  I really don't know. I just heard that there was a big fight from the beginning to the end.   

**Q:**  It was true that they threw the tea pot along with fire pot on his head although I don't know whether he was dead or not. Many monks like Rebe Gyawu got whipped and exiled, but I don't know whether he died or not.   

**A:**  I don't have any idea about this.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> monks refused to come to Mönlam, right? In that year, the Sera Jey monks refused to come to Mönlam, but they did finally come. Because of this incident, there was a slight misunderstanding between Sera Jey and Me because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> was unable to support <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> in all this.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  It was because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> didn't support Jey.   

**Q:**  I have some more questions regarding the Reting event and about Geshe Sherab-la, but I think I will ask you tomorrow.   

**A:**  Geshe Sherab-la was a learned <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> who was sponsored by Surkhang. He taught Kyabji Rimpoche [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] [Trijang] Tibetan grammar. He went to China and had some contact with Phüntso Wangye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ]. Otherwise, he didn't do anything.   

**Q:**  What was Gendün Chömpel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] like?   

**A:**  He was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and he was a great person and very knowledgeable about dialectics and the Tibetan grammar. He was the pupil of the Geshe Sherab.   

**Q:**  Geshe Sherab says that he was his pupil.   

**A:**  No, he told a lie. He was his pupil. Gendün Chömpel was a great liar and he was a layman not a monk.   

**Q:**  Later, he lost his celibacy, right?   

**A:**  He didn't lose his celibacy. He was not a monk from the beginning. I know about him.   

**Q:**  How did he become the pupil of the Geshe Sherab?   

**A:**  He just said that he was Geshe Sherab's pupil and stayed like that. When he came back from India, I was with him from India to Lhasa. He was very skillful in handicrafts like painting and he drew portraits of the 13th Dalai Lama and my Lama. His sponsor was a trader called Könchog Norbu [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་ནོར་བུ] who was a servant of our Labrang and he gave those portraits to him. He also composed a praising poem under the portrait of our Lama. He praised our Lama very highly, probably, this verse might be in our Lama's selected works [Tib. གསུང་འབུམ]. The portrait of the Dalai Lama was like a real live person. Our Lama's portrait looks like this, but it was a double size bigger than this. He wrote in his poem that our Lama was the top of the all the great scholars.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, some Nyingma sect followers are praising Gendün Chömpel very much. So it would be good to have a poem written by Gendün Chömpel praising Phabongka.   

**A:**  If I get the portrait and poem, I will give it to you. Now, as a summary of my talk, if you are going to use my talks for the important matters, I told you the truth. If you are going on a crooked path, please don't use them. It is because Demo Rimpoche is my root guru and you are his son. Therefore, I told you these things. I have never told anybody about this.   

**Q:**  You don't need to worry about that. I will do as you said.   

**A:**  You can use my talk for serving the Dalai Lama. Otherwise, if you are going to use them for making your own living, I swear by the Three Jewels that it would not be okay. Now I am 80 years old. If I could recover from this illness, I hope to go to Tibet and be helpful to our reincarnation. Please pray for me.   

**Q:**  Thank you so much for serving our Lama because he is the life tree of the Gelugpa sect. Now, I am practicing, reading and teaching according to the selected works of Phabongka.   

**A:**  Thank you. Please serve the Dalai Lama as much you can. If you can't be beneficial for him, please do not harm him.   

