# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0224.01   
##  : with Trapchi Tashi and Gusung Thöndrub [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་བཀྲ་ཤིས; སྐུ་སྲུང་དོན་གྲུབ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Trapchi Tashi  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 67  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Trapchi Tashi was a Gusung (Bodyguard) Regiment soldier. In this interview, he discusses, in detail, the fighting of the Sera War, the Trapchi regiment soldiers going to Reting Monastery and the events that occurred there such as buring Reting's summer cottage and killing monks. He also talks about Reting Rimpoche being killed by his guards, verbal fighting between a Trapchi soldier and Magji Keltsul la and Shakabpa when they went to Reting, and how the 4th rupön and other craftsmen like carpenters received the title of Letsempa.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0224_01/H_0224_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  In the 2nd month, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] soldiers were mobilized and a big war took place.   

**Q:**  I will repeat what you told me in brief. Please check if there is any wrong: The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers went to bring Reting and they crossed the Gola mountain pass and brought him through the front of the Sera Monastery. At that time, the monks came out from the stone floor area, but there were no monks near the Ketshang [Tib. ཀེ་ཚང] [Hermitage]. They were coming down from the stone floor and the Jirigang [Tib.?]. At that time, they fired Brenguns from two sides of the Trapchi [Regiment]. The soldiers of the Gusung Regiment were in the sand dam or Jerag [Tib. བྱེ་རག] area and they fired shots. Therefore, the monks withdrew. About two days before that, the Gusung soldiers were stationed in Tsesumthang [Tib. ཚེས་གསུམ་ཐང] and Bari Tsenkhang [Tib. བ་རི་བཙན་ཁང]. When the real war took place, the Trapchi soldiers came down from the mountain top and the Gyantse soldiers came from Chubsang [Tib. ཆུ་བཟང] while the Gusung soldiers came up from the front of the [monastery]. The big war took place on the 7th and it was not concluded. The soldiers went to the monastery on the 8th. At that time, you were a shengo and a trumpeter and you were with Rupön [Tib. རུ་དཔོན] Bükhangwa [Tib. སྦུད་ཁང་བ]. When you went in the monastery on the 9th, probably about 400 monks had been killed and most of the heads and the hands were taken by the Gyantse soldiers, was that correct?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who cut off the ears [of the killed monks]?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers cut off the ears. [laughing]. In the past, normally, the soldiers would go through the motions of cutting off the heads and the hands of the killed soldiers in Kham. At that time, we were told not to cut off the heads and the hands but to cut off the ears. So we just cut off the ears and left the body there. In Jirigang we didn't kill many monks.   

**Q:**  You said that the monks were shooting from the Tsa Khamtshen [Tib. ཚ་བ], right?   

**A:**  Yes, on the 8th, 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers were killed. When I came down from Jirigang, I saw two of them were killed in Chödinggang [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡིང་སྒང]. One of them was killed near the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ལྷོ་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) in Sera Monastery.">Samlo Khamtsen</a> [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ]. One of the old soldiers was killed near the wall and the rock. It was said that he was shot from Samlo Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  How many Gusung soldiers were killed?   

**A:**  They shot from the Tsa Khamtsen and killed Gusung soldiers and the monks also shot from the wall on the road to Nyangral [Tib. མྱང་རལ] and killed one of our trumpeters and I was left alone. Then I went up to the Thawog Linga [Tib. ཐུབ་འོག་གླིང་ག]. Then I was told to blow the trumpet to call the soldiers. When the soldiers came up, two of the teachers and three majors were wounded. Altogether 12 soldiers were wounded. Then at about sunset, we went down and entered the Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] [khamtsen]. When we came along the Tratsang Je [Tib. བྱེས], we saw that the monks had made bunkers out of the pile of assembly cushions and the monks charged forward carrying swords so we had to withdraw for a while. After that, we opened fire, though we couldn't kill monks, we entered the Ngagpa [tratsang] [Tib. སྔགས་པ]. Then we blew a trumpet for calling all the soldiers saying that we had taken over the entire monastery. There was a volunteer fighting monk or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> [Tib. རྡོབ་རྡོབ] nicknamed, "Burning fire on the forehead." Thökhog Member [Tib. thod khog me 'mar]. He came up charging forward through the stone floor of Ngagpa.   

**Q:**  Did he carry a sword?   

**A:**  He was carrying a mauser pistol in his hand. Right at that time, the Gyantse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> whose [one] eye was blind, shot the monk. He blew off his skull. After that, the only way to enter <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> college was to use hand grenades. Otherwise, we were unable to get through because the monks were filled inside.   

**Q:**  I heard that the monks were hiding in the assembly hall.   

**A:**  Yes. When he threw the hand grenade, it didn't even break the window glass much. Only the glass of the front main room or Rabsel [Tib. རབ་གསལ] got a little bit damaged. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> was handed over to us, the Gusung soldiers. This was because we had never been to make war. So they were afraid that the other soldiers might take away things.   

**Q:**  Who handed you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a>?   

**A:**  It was the Dzasa Magji Kelsang Tsültrim [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས]. At that time, even a needle was not lost from that place. The other soldiers took a little bit of foodstuffs and butter from Tsha Mitsen and Hamdong Khamtsen. I am not sure whether they took other things or not.   

**Q:**  That's how it goes usually.   

**A:**  Probably, there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trülku</a> in the Tsha Mitshen [Tib. མི་ཚན]. Some of our majors and shengos took away a few things from him. They also took away a few horses. But the [horses] didn't remain there for a long time, not even a year.   

**Q:**  After that, didn't you go back to Reting again?   

**A:**  After we were sent back from the monastery, in the morning, we were served tea from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> and each of the soldiers were given 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> [Tib. ཞོ]. Then we marched down from the monastery. The Gusung marched at the front and the next was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and then the Gyantse troops. When we arrived at the Trapchi regiment, each of the soldiers were given a brand new 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> note. At that time, the leader was Kabshöpa. The money was paid by the Kashag. Then we, the Gusung soldiers, went directly back to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and the Gyantse unit went back to their regiment and Trapchi remained in Trapchi. After two days, they were sent to Reting again.   

**Q:**  Did they sent the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers?   

**A:**  At that time, the bearded Gusung Gyagpön Thönwang La [Tib. དོན་དབང་ལགས] who was a specialist for firing cannos, was sent with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers. We were stationed in Sera for on guard for a few days. There was one shengo and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅུ་དཔོན] 1. A minor officer in charge of a squad of 10 troops in the traditional Tibetan Army. 2. A minor official.">jugpön</a> and altogether, there were 30 some soldiers. In Trehor Khamtsen, we were given two large tea bricks and two sacks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and a half load of butter. When we arrived at Trapchi, Kabshöpa prostrated towards the Potala and made us stand in a line and gave us 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> from his own hand.   

**Q:**  Didn't you go to arrest <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, after that, I was told to go to arrest Kapshöba.   

**Q:**  Did they leave 15 or 17 soldiers in Reting?   

**A:**  They left one shengo and 15 soldiers.   

**Q:**  After that, the soldiers were destroyed. How did that occur?   

**A:**  Some people said that the soldiers were killed in Reting and some people said that volunteer monks of Sera went to Reting to kill them.   

**Q:**  How did they kill them?   

**A:**  I was not there. I don't know whether they were stabbed or shot.   

**Q:**  Didn't you hear anything about that?   

**A:**  I saw the clothes of the soldiers and there were 5-6 holes, but I am not sure whether they were stabbed or shot.   

**Q:**  All of thir clothes had holes, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This means they shot them.   

**A:**  Yes. I heard they also set fire. There was a house where the guard would stay near the gate of the summer cottage. Later, they burned the house. At that time, one of our soldiers was in that house and he shot upwards at the roof and also shot towards the door so they [the monks] couldn't handle him and they had to burn the house and he was also burned. Anyway, all 15 of the soldiers were killed. We departed on the night of 19th of thew 2nd Lunar month and went to Reting.   

**Q:**  At that time, the soldiers robbed many things, right?   

**A:**  At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> was Shükhüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ]. We went there through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Thakhe [Tib. འབྲི་གུང [?]] and then went to the estate that belonged to Horkhang.   

**Q:**  That estate was called Gyama Trikhar [Tib. རྒྱ་མ་ཁྲི་མཁར].   

**A:**  From that place, we crossed the mountain pass.   

**Q:**  Did you sail coracles down the river from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>?   

**A:**  No, we walked all the way and went to Reting.   

**Q:**  Didn't many soldiers travel in coracles?   

**A:**  At that time, it was said that we won't be able to get through if we didn't travel in coracles. So we took two coracles from the Kharog Shenkha [Tib. ཁ་རོག་ཤན་ཁ] ferry site.   

**Q:**  Did you sail in the coracles?   

**A:**  The coracles were just used for crossing the river and not for sailing down the river.   

**Q:**  Just before you reached Reting, did you fight a little bit?   

**A:**  We didn't fight because we didn't see any monks.   

**Q:**  Didn't they shoot from among the forest?   

**A:**  There were just 1-2 shots fired from inside the forest which made a big sound. Probably, it was Pamala rifle. There wasn't any attack that we had to counter attack. We saw many cartridges strewb around there.   

**Q:**  You went there later on, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there cartridges at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. When we threatened the villagers by turning the bolts of the rifles and asked them, "Where is the abbot and where are the monks? If you don't tell us, we will kill you." They said, "There isn't a single monk in the monastery. There are about 30 monks amidst the forests on the mountain and about 30 monks down there."   

**Q:**  Were there any soldiers who were with Rupön Bükhangwa?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  Were there any soldiers from the Tadang Regiment?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> Lolo [Tib. བློ་བློ] of the Tadang Regiment?   

**A:**  I have never heard about him. Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> Regiment and Rupön Bükhangwa was lost in Denma [Tib. ལྡན་མ]. Dergesey [Tib. sde dge sras was the depön of Tadang Regiment which surrendered to the Chinese. When the Dalai Lama went to China and ཝེ, one Squad [Tib. བཅུ་ཤོག] of soldiers went to Chamdo, on the way there was a hermitage and we went there wearing our uniform made from the American serge. We got there first and the [People's Liberation Army] regiment which used to be the Tadang Regiment, came later followed by some Chinese students. At that time, one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> in the Tadang Regiment was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> and we knew him. In the past, when I was about 18-19 old, we, some of the trumpeters, were sent to work on the construction on the Tibetan Medical Astrological Instrument, the Mentsikhang [Tib. སྨན་རྩིས་ཁང] and at that time, that Gyagpön of the Tadang Regiment who was a Khamba was over there as a cadre and the two of us got into a fight and I beat him up and he was bleeding a lot. At that time, the Gusung Depön was Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག]. Right after that, the whistle was blown for lunchtime. I thought that I would be beaten with switches because of the fight, but I didn't care. I took a Khata and went to the depön. Then the depön asked me, "Did he hit you? I said, "No." Then I went to back to the regiment and they asked me whether I got beaten with the switches and I said no. This was what happened in the past. When I met the Khamba Gyagpön in Chamdo, he didn't say anything. He just said, "You were a small boy and you have grown up a lot." At that time, Dergesey came up and he was very impudent to me [Tib. སྐྱག་ཁྲལ་ཤོད] and said, "Who the hell told you to carry these guns?"   

**Q:**  Did he tell you, the Gusung soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  He was the in charge of the Public Security Bureau [Ch. gong an ju] in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  But, you were the Gusung soldiers, right?   

**A:**  I told him, "When we came from Lhasa, Yuthok, the residence of the Chinese officials in Lhasa, both the Tibetan Government and the Chinese didn't tell us that we are not allowed to carry weapons. Are you saying that we are not allowed to carry weapons? Now, this is the condition of your soldiers here." At that time, the Tadang soldiers had cut their hairs short and they are wearing cloth uniform and going to carry fertilizer. Like this, I verbally fought with Dergesey very severely. After that, we had to buy some tea bricks in Chamdo. At that time, in Chamdo one tea brick cost 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> and in Lhasa it is 45 srang. The tea bricks had to be bought from Dergesey. We didn't know any body in Chamdo in the past, we were just shut in the house right after we arrived there. Probably, we arrived at about 17th of the 4th Lunar month.   

**Q:**  You mean on your way back you arrived at Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, we had to sit facing each other with the Chinese and we didn't talk to each other. After that, they gave each of our soldiers 1,000 Chinese <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> as we thought it would be useless to take the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> to Tibet. So this was the money for buying the tea bricks.   

**Q:**  Later, did he sell you the tea bricks?   

**A:**  I went to see him and I saluted to him and told him to sell a little bit of tea bricks to be used for gifts in Lhasa." He said, "How much do you need? I said, each of us need about 10 baskets of tea bricks." He sold us the tea bricks.   

**Q:**  So on the 13th of the 3rd month, you went to Reting, right?   

**A:**  On that day, we went to Reting to make the war, but when we arrived at Reting, we didn't need to make the war because there were no monks there. The monks were amidst the forest and they were shooting a little bit from there. At that time, we had the cannon and when we fired the cannon a little bit, they also fired shots from among the forest and the bullets fell near the mules, but there waren't any casualties. On the day when we brought the Regent Reting, one shelngo called Tenzin la [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་ལགས] was killed.   

**Q:**  Did they shoot him?   

**A:**  Yes, the shengo was from the Jangrashar Yuloshag [Tib. ལྕང་ར་ཤར་གཡུ་ལོ་ཤག].   

**Q:**  Didn't they said that the person who killed the shengo was Jangrashar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, who was related to him?   

**A:**  On that day, he was overly brave and went carrying the gun called Lewis gun and then the monks shot him. We didn't know who killed him for 2-3 days and we said that the shengo was missing. After that, when we were able to arrest the ring leaders of Reting, we knew that he was shot dead.   

**Q:**  When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers came from Samlo or Hamdong carrying the military flag to be hoisted on the roof of the monastery assembly hall, the soldier had a son who was a monk and he killed his father and he himself was also killed, was that correct?   

**A:**  There wasn't any such thing that happened. The soldier who was carrying the flag was from Nyan [Tib. གཉན] and they were not father and son. I saw that he was shot here [pointing his finger some where] and lost hold of the flag. So our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> whose [one] eye was blind, picked up the flag. The soldier also didn't die. He was brought on a stretcher to the hospital in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</a> [Tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག].   

**Q:**  At that time, Reting was destroyed into pieces [Tib. ཐེར་ཚལ་སྦར་ཚལ], right?   

**A:**  Yes, a lot of things were taken from Reting.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> prohibit the soldiers from taking things?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, there was a soldier called Wangchug Chembo [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆེན་པོ] who was doing things in a devil-may-care manner [Tib. སྐྱིད་མེད་སྡུག་ཟད] and who later he became a major. He argued against the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> saying, "It was right that people say, "There should be looting when you lose the war [Tib. དམག་ཤོར་ཇག་ཤོར]. You are saying that we are not allowed to take things. So bring me a fire without smoke and water without bubbles. [Tib. me la du ba med pa dang qu la lbu ba med pa]." He verbally fought against the magji and the magji was about to shoot him with his mauser pistol, but he didn't dare to. Then Wangchug Chembvo told the magji, "If you want to shoot me, go ahead and shoot! If not, I am going to shoot you." and he turned his gun bolt and loaded the gun and went to shoot the magji. Then one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> intervened between them told them not to do that and the Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] and all of them seized him. He also verbally fought with Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱང་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet in the traditional era.">changji</a> (Governor of the North), right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was the fourth <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> [of Trapchi]?   

**A:**  He was the late outer fifth rank [Tib. ཕྱིའི་གནས་ལྔ་པ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ], Rupön Kelsang La [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Was he the Rupön Kelsang during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> regency?   

**A:**  No, this was the first rupön.   

**Q:**  Where did the fourth <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> live?   

**A:**  He lived near the Kaling Goshi [Tib. ཀར་ནེ་སྒོ་བཞི] stupa.   

**Q:**  Do you know where he was from?   

**A:**  He was born in E [Tib. ཨེ] in Lhoka. He became a soldier and gradually became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> rupön.   

**Q:**  When did he get the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> rank?   

**A:**  It had been quite a long time ago.   

**Q:**  Was that before the Reting war?   

**A:**  Yes, it was long before that.   

**Q:**  Who gave him the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> title?   

**A:**  Probably, it was during Reting. No, it was not during Reting. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> gave him the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> title. Yes, probably it was during Taktra. The fourth <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and rupön Anan Dawa [Tib. ཨ་ནན་ཟླ་བ] both got the fifth rank.   

**Q:**  Was that during <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they give the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> for an accomplishment?   

**A:**  Probably, it was for their accomplishment from early times. I don't understand this. There was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> called Bu tsering [Tib. བུ་ཚེ་རིང] who didn't make any war, but he also got the letsenpa. The master carpenter Phünkhangshar [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ཤར] also got the letsenpa. Gyagpön Anan Dawa was very famous, but the fourth rupön was just a reliable person [Tib. ཚུགས་ཆེན་པོ] in the regiment, otherwise, he didn't have any special [accomplishment].   

