# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0009.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Chape, Tseden Phüntso [Tib. ཆབ་སྤེལ, ཚེ་བསྟན་ཕུན་ཚོགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Chape, Tseden Phüntso [Tib. ཆབ་སྤེལ, ཚེ་བསྟན་ཕུན་ཚོགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 71  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chape [Tib. ཆབ་སྤེལ] was a Tibetan government lay official. In this interview, he discusses what he saw in the Chinese official documents about the Dalai Lama's visit to the Military Headquarters in 1959.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0009_02/H_0009_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  It's clear that the disturbance was caused by telling people that the Chinese were taking the Dalai Lama to China and [that would mean] it is finished. So they came out to prostrate and block his leaving Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Did they really tell him not to bring the Gusung [bodyguard regiment troops]?   

**A:**  There is a document which contains all of the Dalai Lama's letters and the conversation between the generals and Gadrang Lobsang Rinzin (Tib. བློ་བཟང་རིག་འཛིན). I don't think they told him not to bring the Gusung. I didn't see in the documents that they said don't bring Gusung troops. It was said that the Dalai Lama said that he is coming. So we [Chinese] said we welcome him to come and we will make the preparations. And the Dalai Lama was very happy and we told the Dalai Lama to decide whatever date and time he will come. Gadrang was the person reporting to him and passing down the answers [Tib. ཡར་ཞུ་མར་གནང].   

**Q:**  What I heard was that it involved the Gusung Depön.   

**A:**  The Gusung Depön was not involved in this. I don't know whether there were relations between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> about whether to take the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་སྲུང] 1. Bodyguard. 2. The &quot;Bodyguard&quot; Regiment of the Dalai Lama that was also known as the Kadang (tib. ཀ་དང) Regiment. 2. The Bodyguard Regiment of the Panchen Lama.">gusung</a> or not, but for the regular discussions between the personnel of the Military Headquarters and the Dalai Lama, it was Gadrang. They went to Gadrang 2-3 times to fix the dates and then they waited there. While they [military personnel] were waiting, they heard that all of the people were going to Norbulinga. When they sent people to look, it was said that there is a disturbance. This was the time when Phagpalha Khenjung was killed.   

**Q:**  Is this written in a document?   

**A:**  It was written in an official propaganda document. I recall probably there is a book called "Cause of the Revolt" [Tib. ཟིང་འཁྲུགས་ལངས་རྐྱེན] that has all this, but I'm not sure. Otherwise I was in Shigatse so what I know is from these documents. The Dalai Lama's letters to the general went via Ngabö and the letters were in the Dalai Lama's real hand writing which I could identify, so this is the most reliable. Usually, people could not get in the Military Headquarters indiscriminately and likewise, people couldn't get into the Dalai Lama indiscriminately. It was written in the document that the generals met Gadrang and discussed the visit, and Gadrang also made some corrections.   

**Q:**  Was it written in the document who gave the message to the Lhasa people?   

**A:**  It was not written about the person, but it was written that the Korchagpa in each area delivered the message. The message was to go to do prostrations to the Dalai Lama [and block the road] and said that it will not be okay if you don't come. But it did not say who gave the order from above.   

