# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0201.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Könchok Samden [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:**  Könchok Samden [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 62  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Könchok Samden [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན] was an official of the Drigung Labrang in Tibet. In this interview, he talks about Reting Rimpoche, the Sera Jey War and about how the Tibetan soldiers looted everything from Reting monastery. He also talks about Pandatsang's role as government trader in wool, about how the Kazaks were robbed when they were fleeing from China to Tibet as well as about how the famous bandit Gargya Dramnay was killed by Phala. He also explained how Drigung Chetsang Rimpoche fled from Lhasa and about how the Chinese first came to Drigung. There is also a detailed discussion of a major law case between the senior and junior incarnate lamas of Drgiung Nuba Labrang and a long note regarding the Shatra family and its law case with Lhayönla, Shatra's daughter. There is also a discussion about how most people who lived in Lhasa earned their living.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0201_03/H_0201_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  After the misfortune of Reting Labrang, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> was also released did you have any talks with him?   

**A:**  I didn't meet the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>. The [senior] dzasa dargen [Tib. དར་ཧན] had served Reting for three incarnations.   

**Q:**  At that time, didn't you talk about it [the Reting incident]?   

**A:**  After the enthronement of the [new] reincarnation of Reting, one day I went to have an audience with the reincarnation of Reting Rimpoche and also met the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> dargen.   

**Q:**  Did you talk with him about the Reting incident?   

**A:**  No, he didn't talk about that. He told me, "I have been serving three reincarnations of Reting as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>. The new one is very amazing and excellent. You can trust in him and you should come and see him." When I finally went up, he took me to the new young Reting reincarnation and dzasa dargen introduced me to the reincarnation saying: "This is the trader Tsongpön Dündül's [Tib. ཚོང་དཔོན་བདུད་འདུལ] son. He used to come to your previous incarnation very often; he was very close to him. Do you recognize him?" The little, young Reting Rimpoche said: "Yes of course, I recognize him."   

**Q:**  Did the reincarnation say that?   

**A:**  I swear by the statue of the Buddha in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> that he said that, though he was very small then.   

**Q:**  Later, the attendants of Reting from Reting Labrang didn't say anything about the Reting event, right?   

**A:**  Yes, maybe it was because we didn't make many connections with them. But when those people like Gara Chöndze who had gone to China came back, they told us what happened to them.   

**Q:**  From the historical point of view, it was said that Reting's people were sent to China to seek help. Secret telegrams were sent by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> to the Kashag and in their telegram it was written about Reting offering to giving the areas below Chamdo to the Chinese if Reting regained the regency and they also wrote in the telegram that if this talk leaked out we would be killed.   

**A:**  I can't tell you anything about this.   

**Q:**  What did those people who came back say?   

**A:**  As far as they told me, they went down there [to China] and tried to see Chairman Mao. They tried their best to get support from those areas. Finally, it happened it was the time that communism was taking power in China. There was no where they could go. The communists had taken over and they joined the communist army and they [the Reting people] sort of showed them the way and they came along with them [the People's Liberation Army] to Tibet. That is all they could do. That is what I heard.   

**Q:**  So they couldn't do anything, right? How did they hear about Reting's death? When Reting was brought to Potala, the Sera monks did a very stupid thing, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when Reting Rimpoche was brought from Reting Monastery, what I heard was that the monks said that Reting Rimpoche was going to come through the Phöndo side so they went to Phöndo and waited there [to try to free him]. However, Reting Rimpoche came through the Gola pass. Then they heard that Reting was imprisoned. As far as his death is concerned, it was the normal talk that the Mayor of Lhasa, the one with the twisted mouth, Mipön Porkyok [Tib. མི་དཔོན་སྤོར་ཀྱོག] squeezed his testicles and killed him. That was the common talk and belief.   

**Q:**  It was said that Reting screamed very loudly, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the people were saying that when the soldiers were on guard, Mipön Porkyok and some people went in and after some time Reting screamed loudly "Yeow", something like that. Thereafter, Reting Rimpoche was found dead. That was the way people were talking. Some people also said that they might have put nails through him or they have tied his neck or hanged him. All sort of things were said. Finally, the body was handed over to Reting Labrang and it was brought to the Shide. A lot of people went to see his remains (Tib. དུངཇེལ [གདུང་མཇལ]). I was so scared, I could not go. They said that this showed that there wasn't any damage done to his body, for example through cutting or beating, etc.   

**Q:**  I heard that at that time was one representative from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, one from the Dalai Lama's secretariat, one from the Regent's secretariat, one from the Kashag, the abbots from Sera, and the officials from Reting Labrang were there.   

**A:**  Yes, that was to show that no damage had been done to his body.   

**Q:**  I also heard that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> representative was Tsarong Sawangchemmo. Did you hear that?   

**A:**  I vaguely remember that he was there and there was even a report that he said: "There is nothing to see."   

**Q:**  I heard that Tsarong went there to check the body and when he came back, he told the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>: "I went there and checked his body. As far as the interrogation was concerned, it was done by the tsondu. We invited him to the tsondu. We put a cushion there and he was seated nicely. Nobody ever hit him or even flicking one's finger [at him]. There was no wound or anything on his body, but we saw one kind of blue bruise mark on his buttocks. Perhaps he was beaten by a ghost or a protective deity." And then he started laughing and everybody laughed and then they disappeared. Did you ever hear this?   

**A:**  No, I haven't heard this but it could have happened because Tsarong was that kind of a person. He was very brave and he could probably have said this. But I never heard this.   

**Q:**  At that time, one of the prison guards was Porkyok and other was the monk official nicknamed "Nepalese" (Tib. ཕེཔོ [བལ་པོ]). He went home that night, but he told the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> that he was there. If Reting hadn't died that night, the verdict was going to be issued on the next day because Reting had confessed to whatever he was asked and said everything was done by himself. He even confessed about the bomb incident.   

**A:**  What would the verdict have been? The members of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> might have known that.   

**Q:**  Yes, but [other] people didn't know that at all. [Note; The interviewer talks a lot for a long time about what happened in the tsondu and about Reting in general in a very low voice that could not be translated].   

**Q:**  What happened after Reting Rimpoche's death?   

**A:**  Nothing happened, because after his death everything was like a stone thrown into the water.   

**Q:**  What happened to Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] Rimpoche?   

**A:**  Khardo Rimpoche died. [note: I think this is wrong because Khardo Rimpoche remained in prison. He was released later and died much later after that.]   

**Q:**  What about the Sera war? Do you remember anything?   

**A:**  As I mentioned to you earlier, I was there. However, I do not know what really happened or what was the cause, etc. However, every morning they said people were talking and were trying to negotiate. Every morning I saw some Khambas riding their horses and going there. One day, finally, they said: "The negotiations have failed." The next day, about the time of sunrise, they called everybody to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] House in Banagshö for a meeting. I was called also for the meeting, because the traders in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦྲ་ནག་ཞོལ] A neighborhood in the northeast section of Lhasa inhabited mostly by Khambas.">Banagshöl</a> were all called for the meeting, so I went and attended the meeting. We were informed, "They are making war with Sera and there is a danger that the monks might charge into Lhasa. Therefore, you should guard the places." They divided and assigned all the traders living in the Banagshöl area to be on guard at different places. I was assigned to stay on the roof of the Tshatrutsang [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང] house, and I stayed there.   

**Q:**  Was there any difference in those meetings between the people who were close to Reting and those who were not?   

**A:**  Nothing was said about that. They just simply divided the people to go to different places to be on guard. Certain people had to go to the Ramoche side, the southern side, to Mindrubu [Tib. སྨིན་དྲུག་སྦུག], north side, etc. So I went to the Tshatrutsang house. It was for a very short period and one morning it was said that the war was over. We were looking up and suddenly we could hear the sound of canon shots. When we looked up we could see some smoke coming out of the Sera mountain top [Tib. རྩེ་རི] and we said to each other, "Now they are shooting at the monastery." We didn't know where it hit. Later, we heard that the Sera monks used the churns as a canon by putting gunpowder in them. After some time they said, "The war is over." It went on for a very, very short period, like several hours.   

**Q:**  If I remember correctly, I do remember some people who were wearing ordinary laymen's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> made from green Italian serge standing at the corner of Reting Labrang, shooting guns from there. There must have been plenty of them. Do you remember?   

**A:**  No, I don't remember that. The Sera War only lasted a few hours. [Note: There is a detailed report of the Sera War provided by Taring that is available on H.0203.]   

**Q:**  Was the Lugong [Tib. གླུད་སྒོང] scapegoat and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> Sebang [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྦྲེང] ceremony done that year?   

**A:**  They might have done them, but I don't remember exactly. Actually, there was no trouble in Lhasa at all, except that the monks came down once and entered into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང] House in order to take arms and ammunition from there. That was all. There was no other incident at all in Lhasa. For sure other things might have gone wrong. In Sandutsang, a few monks were killed. Those monks were wearing a sort of layman's white woolen chupa.   

**Q:**  Who killed them?   

**A:**  Probably, they were killed by the soldiers.   

**Q:**  After that, didn't the soldiers go to Reting Labrang and tear it to pieces?   

**A:**  Yes, they also did this in Sera.   

**Q:**  I don't think that Sera was torn to pieces.   

**A:**  Oh yes. They tore Sera into pieces and after a few days the head ornaments of the statues and the ritual objects like water offering containers and copper basins, etc., were available for sale throughout Lhasa.   

**Q:**  They sold the water offering bowls and the butter lamp containers very cheap, right? I also heard that a soldier brought a golden statue of the Vajra Yogini [Tib. རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ] and smashed it under the Phünkang house.   

**A:**  Yes, we heard that they had pulled down all the scriptures and they were walking on the scriptures and were taking everything. They did the same thing when they destroyed Reting Monastery.   

**Q:**  Those articles belonged to Reting. They didn't do anything to Sera, right?   

**A:**  They also took the things from Sera.   

**Q:**  Are you sure there were articles from Sera?   

**A:**  Yes, people were saying, "The things that belonged to Sera were sold on the market." They [soldiers] took the things from places where they could get in to. I don't know whether they could get in everywhere in Sera.   

**Q:**  The Sera war was fought for couple of days, right?   

**A:**  No, it didn't take that long. It took a couple of days when they were saying that they were going to negotiate. But when the war started in the morning, it was over and Sera was lost at around mid-morning.   

**Q:**  Probably, in that year, the Dalai Lama entered the monk's order [Tib. ཆོས་ཞུགས] in [ceremonies at] the three great monasteries.   

**A:**  That was the next year.   

**Q:**  What was the impression of people in the countryside when they made war against Reting Labrang?   

**A:**  All the people had great regret. They probably didn't think that this misfortune was caused by the misdeeds of Reting.   

**Q:**  At the time of the Reting regency, government affairs were carried out normally. So what happened at that time when Reting had the misfortune?   

**A:**  Sometimes they would go to make reports to the Regent but I don't think they did that everyday.   

**Q:**  They [the shape] just reported it through the nendrön. They would not visit the Regent in person and submit documents, right?   

**A:**  Probably, I don't know these internal things.   

**Q:**  When would the Regent look at the reports?   

**A:**  Probably he would look at them in the morning. We did not pay attention to these things.   

**Q:**  Around that time, the government sent a few people to collect the gold and silver, etc. Do you remember?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Around that time wasn't the government involved in trade?   

**A:**  Not at that time, but earlier there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Government Trader (Panda shungtsong [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་གཞུང་ཚོང]). The wool from the four regions in the north (Tib. Jangrig Deshi [བྱང་རིགས་སྡེ་བཞི]) would be sold to Pandatsang.   

**Q:**  What was that? Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> and the government join together?   

**A:**  No. It was that the government's trade handled by Pandatsang.   

**Q:**  Did the government have some fixed rate on the wool at that time, because the government had issued orders saying that no one could sell wool outside except for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a>?   

**A:**  No, probably they never had fixed the rates. Not only that, when I went down later for trade, people told me that normally they would weigh the wool, but when they had to sell the wool to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a>, not only didn't they have a fixed rate, but they would not weigh the wool and the would just approximately say let it be regarded as 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> or 6 khe.   

**Q:**  And they were not allowed to sell it to other people, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What if they sold it like black marketeering [Tib. ནག་ཚོང]?   

**A:**  They could sell it like that, but just in small amounts.   

**Q:**  They might also not be allowed to keep wool, right?   

**A:**  Probably they could keep a little bit for making sacks and for buying grain and so on.   

**Q:**  Some Americans had come and were killed on the road. Do you know anything about this? It was on the Xinjiang side.   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  A lot of Kazaks came to Tibet. How many were there?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that many Kasaks came through Chamdo, but many of them were robbed by bandits. I think they had revolted against the Chinese and they were on the run. They couldn't get through to Lhasa so they went to up Tö and on the way they met the bandits and many people were killed when they fought each other. Just a few of them came to Lhasa. So probably most of them got scattered.   

**Q:**  I remember the Kazaks were good at tanning leather, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Probably they were robbed by the Tibetan bandit called Gargya Dramnag [Tib. གར་རྒྱ་འགྲམ་ནག] who had a black birthmark on his cheek?   

**A:**  Gargya Damnag was much later. He was killed by Phala. Probably the Chinese bandits came and killed most of them.   

**Q:**  When did this happen? Please tell me about Gargya Dramnag. Where was he from? Wasn't that during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> regency?   

**A:**  Probably, it was at the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, but I am not sure about the time. He was the leader of one of the 39 Hortshopa [Tib. ཧོར་ཚོ་པ་གསུམ་བཅུ་སོ་དགུ] (39 nomad tribes in the north). There was a governor of the 39 tribes who was called the Hor Gyesey [Tib. ཧོར་རྒྱལ་སྲས] (the Hor Prince).   

**Q:**  When you said the 39 tribes, was it the northern nomads which we usually called Abo hor or was it some who were under the Chinese?   

**A:**  Those were not the Abo hor. In general, they were called 39 Hortsho. In Lhasa, they would call the nomads who came from Nagchu and Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན] Abo hor. They didn't call the nomads from the far away north that.   

**Q:**  Some of them were called Horkhok [Tib. ཧོར་ཁོག], right?   

**A:**  The Horkhok were different. It was much further away than these. These were Hortsho, the real Hor. The people in Lhasa did not refer to them as "Abo hor" but as "Hortsho."   

**Q:**  Were they located near <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  No. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> (Tömey) area was completely under Tibetan rule [?]. Those 39 Hortsho were beyond that.   

**Q:**  Gargya Dramnag was from the 39 Hortsho, right?   

**A:**  He was one of the ministers [Tib. བློན་པོ] under the Hor Gyesey. At that time, the Hortsho internally could not get along well and had fought and killed many of their own. When this was going on continuously, finally this Gargya attacked them very strongly and one of the Horthso called Hor Bondama [Tib. ?], couldn't resist and many households had to flee completely to the area where there were the 25 tribes called Thimchi Nyishu Tsenga [Tib. དིམ་ཆི་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་ལྔ] who fell under the king of Nangchen (Tib. ནངཆེན་གྱལྤོ [ནང་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ]). They had to run away to there.   

**Q:**  Where were the eight tribes of Dam (Tib. དམ་གྱཤོག་གྱེ [འདམ་བརྒྱ་ཤོག་བརྒྱད])?   

**A:**  They were located near Lhasa. One of the relations of Gargya Dramnag was given as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> to a rich family in the Bondama tribe. After that, this household couldn't get along well with another household called Tshabshi [Tib. ?] in Bondama and they had a fight. It was the beginning or root of the incident of Gargya Dramnag. The name of the person who was given as a magpa was Gargya Sangdak [Tib. གསང་བདག]. Later this household killed Gargya Sangdak and this was the cause. It was in this period when the nine divisions of Nagshö (Tib. Nagshö Tsoggu [ནག་ཤོད་ཚོ་དགུ), had been taken over by <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>=as=Taktra=Labrang's=religious=estate=(Tib.=chöshi).=Immediately=after=the=fight,=a=case=was=filed=to=Nagshö=Biru=Dzong=head=[Tib. ནག་ཤོད་འབྲི་རུ་རྫོང], the governor of the 9 tshopa, which was then Taktra's possession. At that time, they sent a messenger calling for Gargya Sangdak. When Gargya Sangdak went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, he was ambushed and killed on the way. After this Gargya Dramnag ambushed one of Tsabshitsang's sons. Gargya was then only 17 or 18 years old so he became a great person because he was able to retaliate for the death of his brother Gargya Sangdak. Then Tsabshitsang kind of deceived them and resorted to negotiation, telling Dramnag, "There is no way to challenge you. So please let's get this settled." They wanted to settle it amicably by giving certain things to Gargya Dramnag. So they decided that there would be no more fighting between them and there was peace. After that, they became friends and once when Gargya Dramnag came to Lhasa on pilgrimage, on the way he spent the night at Tsabshitsang. Tsabshitsang insisted that he should spend an extra day and he gave him a very good feast. Not only that, he also gave a lot of gifts. On top of that, they also even asked him to buy certain commodities, like rice, etc. from Lhasa and send some things to be sold in Lhasa. They also established a business link. However, when Dramnag left and was passing through the Shugola Mountain pass [Tib. ཤོག་བུ་ལ] near Lhasa, Tsabshi brought a group and tried to ambush Dramnag at the Shugola Pass. They were unable to kill Gargya, but nine people were killed including another brother of Gargya Dramnag and his wife and child. However, Gargya Dramnag himself could not be killed and escaped. It was said that Dramnag was the son of a Tsen [Tib. བཙན](a kind of spirit) and could not get hit with weapons. That night, according to Dramnag, he and his wife and children slept off on one side of the tent. The servants slept all around. One of the servants went out to look at the animals. Suddenly Tsabshitsang came and cut off all the ropes of the tent and fired on every single thing they could see protruding. Since Gargya Damnag was sleeping with his wife and children, he was able to escape from there [from the edge of the tent since bullets couldn't kill him].   

**Q:**  Gargya Dramnag was know to be very evil [Tib. ངན་པོ], right?   

**A:**  Yes. From there he came straight to Lhasa wearing the clothes that he was wearing that night. He came to see me. I saw his dress. It was full of holes, yet he didn't die and came all the way to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What did he tell you?   

**A:**  He said that before he ran away from there, he realized that his wife was killed; he was hoping that his child may be alive. He tugged his child once, but he saw that his intestines were coming out. Then he ran down to where the other man was looking after the animals. He said that night he stayed in between some rocks, looking down at the camp. They (tshabshitsang) opened up all the tents and finally they said, "The real one is gone." Then the Tsabshitsang people took everything including the weapons and went away. In such a condition Dramnag and his servant came to Lhasa. Normally Dramnag stayed in Lhasa with Yuthok. That time, since we were friends, he came also to see me. That day when he arrived at Yuthok's house, a little after that he came to see me. Damnag showed me all his clothes, and then he wanted help. Everyone who knew him in Lhasa, we all helped him, here and there. He was mostly collecting weapons. At that time, there were quite a number of people from Dramnag's area in Lhasa. Dramnag collected quite a lot of weapons from Lhasa and went up, because the Tsabshitsang trader had gone to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> area to buy grain. While they were coming down, Dramnag ambushed them in the Dam area and killed those people and took all their properties. Then he went back to his own place. By that time, Tsabshitsang had completely left the area and had gone deep inside Chinese territory. Then Gargya collected people, about 70-80 cavalry.   

**Q:**  This was like making war, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was like a big war. They all went down to attack Tsabshitsang. I was again in Hor at that time and I saw Gargya going down [toward China]. Since he was a Bönpo he had, according to the Bon system, black banners. They went down and I saw it. When he had reached there, people were saying, "Tsabshitsang's sons have gone to attack Dramnag." Whatever the reason was, there were something like 13 or 14 people of Tsabshi. They were not in their camp, but there were a few families around, about 10-15 of them. He [Dramnag] ambushed all of the people who were in the camp indiscriminately. You can almost say that every human being that breathed was killed. While he was returning he had about 200-300 animals to bring with him, one or two guns, 13 or 14 horses. It took him about a month to get back. At that time, Tsabshitsang had escaped and the actual main opponent of the Gargya Damnag was Tsabshi Anam. Probably, he was quite tough and also cunning and he might have sent many petitions to the Tibetan Government saying, "Gargya Dramnag is forcefully bullying the government's subjects, so they no longer could stay there and had to run away, etc." Anyway, he had written a lot in the petition. Finally, it was the time when Phala, the governor of the north [Tib. ཆངཇི], killed Dramnag. Probably he was under orders from the government.   

**Q:**  What kind of person was Dramnag? Was he a kind of bandit?   

**A:**  The reason why Dramnag became famous was that when he was 16 or 17 he ambushed, or rather killed in a sword fight, one of the very well-known and strong bandits in those areas, I forgot the name now. That was why Dramnag had become very well known.   

**Q:**  This was because he couldn't get hit with the swords but he could hit the other person, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the other one was also a person that nobody could handle. Later, Dramnag was killed by Phala. The killing of this famous man was very unusual. Gargya Dramnag was slightly different from his brothers. They had 5 brothers and Gargya Dramnag was really known as Gargya Könchok Gyentsen [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. The other Gargya brothers were not that brave, etc. He was a slightly different kind of person. His other brothers like Gargya Karma [Tib. ཀར་མ] and Gargya Trinley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས] just lived with their wives. Totally, when I counted it up, I heard that they [Gargya's people] had killed 39 men in the fighting during a period of three years.   

**Q:**  How did Phala kill Gargya Dramnag?   

**A:**  There was a man called Tsasho Palden Drakpa [Tib. ཚྭ་ཤོ་དཔལ་ལྡན་གྲགས་པ]. He was the person who had been deceiving Gargya Dramnag and doing instigation between Phala and Gargya Damnag. This person used to be a Tibetan soldier. Probably he was with the bodyguards of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང], the Doji. Later he became the trader of Trendong. He would shave the front part of his head while braiding his hair like the Chinese hair style [Tib. རྒྱ་མགོ]. The reason people called him Tsasho was because he was sent to collect salt taxes in Tshotö Gemarkha [Tib. མཚོ་སྟོད་གད་དམར་ཁ]. Palden Drakpa was able to trick Gargya Dramnag to go to see Phala saying, "Nothing will happen to you if you go to see Phala. Because this is a government order, it is very difficult not to go. You should not offend them." So finally Gargya Dramnag went and saw Phala. Phala made a sort of friendship with Gargya Dramnag, and they started playing mahjong. Phala gave him a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> and liquor to drink, so he got drunk. They played mahjong till 1-2 a.m. When he was leaving, he couldn't even walk and he had to be held by two people. At that time, Phala had arranged soldiers in the courtyard and when he had gone down the stone steps, since they couldn't hit him with swords, they used stones. They hit him with big stones from above. They stoned him. He had a Mauser pistol in his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> pouch which he took out and he called his servant Karma. He shouted: "Karma, Karma. Now it is finished." That is how Phala killed Dramnag; how he deceived him and killed him.   

**Q:**  Was this on the first day?   

**A:**  I don't think so. Maybe on the second or third day. So Phala killed him in that way. People used to say, "If Gargya Dramnag had escaped, he could have been useful for the Tibetan Government, especially later, when the Chinese came up. Anyway, Phala had to remain very alert for a long time, even when he was traveling from Hor Bachen [Tib. ཧོར་སྦྲ་ཆེན] to Gemarkha [Tib. གད་དམར་ཁ], he had to dress like an ordinary soldier. From among the servants and soldiers, one of them was dressed up in the way Phala should have when he traveled around. Even when he reached Gemarkha [Tib. བྱེ་མ་ཁ], which was quite far away, he would not sleep in the tent. He had to remain up until very late in the night. As far as Gargya Dramnag was concerned, his friends got together and said, "We should do something." Some said, "No, you can't do anything." Others said, "It is too difficult to challenge, etc." Then Phala was transferred and they could not do anything thereafter.   

**Q:**  It was around this time, 1949 that the Chinese who were living in Lhasa were all kicked out. Do you remember anything?   

**A:**  Yes, I do, but I don't know what the Kashag's reason was for the decision. All the Guomindang Chinese who were living around there were sent back.   

**Q:**  How did this happen?   

**A:**  I don't know this in detail, but I was in Lhasa at that time.   

**Q:**  Before that, did you hear that the Chinese were going to be expelled?   

**A:**  I don't have much to tell you about this. What we heard was that these people had some very bad connections, so they all had to leave Tibet. I don't remember the exact time, but they fixed a certain time and within a certain period they had to leave. So they were preparing to go and sold their belongings. I even bought some things. I bought some chairs, tables, etc. from them. Finally they left.   

**Q:**  Did they sell them cheap?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they take their family members [means Tibetan wives]?   

**A:**  Probably all the family members didn't go. Some of them went and some of them got divorced and stayed behind.   

**Q:**  How did they go and how were they sent?   

**A:**  I think they were sent through India and then by sea back to China. That is what we heard, but I don't remember very clearly.   

**Q:**  Around that time, a little later maybe, the Chinese started sending radio broadcasts to Tibet, right?   

**A:**  I don't remember radio broadcasts at all, but at the time when Chamdo was lost we recognized the present <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön Chetsang [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་སྐྱབས་མགོན་ཆེ་ཚང].   

**Q:**  No, it was before that. The Chinese broadcast radio messages and the Tibetan government did radio broadcasts back.   

**A:**  I don't remember that at all. I didn't hear about it. As I mentioned, it was the period when the present <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Rimpoche was recognized. They did this ceremony in the Drigung monastery. He went to Drigung Thil [Tib. མཐིལ]. I do remember, I think it was in Thil, that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> were listening to the radio, but we didn't have them. The village people didn't have radios at all. They were listening to the radios saying, "It is not good, there was a disturbance in Chamdo. We do not dare to stay. We have to go quickly." We had been arguing that we had to finish the ceremonies." They insisted that, "You have to leave." We had quite a lot of discussions on this matter. Finally, the ceremonies had to be performed, but very fast. Then straight away Drigung Rimpoche and the others left for Lhasa and went to India.   

**Q:**  At that time, Mr. Tsarong [the new incarnation was from the Tsarong family] and all were saying: "Now it is dangerous, you have to rush." We were saying, "What nonsense. Probably they just want to go back to Lhasa, which is why they are rushing things." We didn't even believe it and it did not bother us. Anyway, things were rushed and even then we were not convinced at all. We really didn't believe it until the Chinese came to the door. When they came to the door, we were really scared. They came through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>. They passed through Drigung but I was not there at that time. I was in the north. When I came back, I saw a lot of mules had died when the Chinese passed the narrow pass called Drigung Phowa Dzankhar [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་ཕོ་བ་རྫ྄་མཁར]. The Chinese had been very stupid and the villagers were afraid. When the mules were dying, they [Chinese] didn't even know what to do and they were pulling the mules with ropes and were showing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> silver coins and holding up their thumbs [in the begging gesture] to the people and also to the mules, saying: "Please, please!" [Tib. སྐུ་མཁྱེན]. They were asking the people and also the mules to move. That was the way the villagers were talking. However, a lot of mules died on that road. Not only had a lot of animals died, but a lot of people also died. Everywhere when I come back, they were showing me some stones saying here is where they used stones to make a cooking stove. Here, there, here, there, everywhere. People also said, here is where one Chinese corpse was buried, here is where another Chinese corpse was buried." A lot of Chinese died from hunger and cold.   

**Q:**  Do you know Gendün Chompel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ]?   

**A:**  I didn't know Gendün Chompel personally, but I saw him. He used to live in one of the houses of a clerk of the Sonam Legung. He was famous then. Later, I heard that he was a foreign spy. The government arrested him and he was whipped. They also said, "He never used to drink, but after his arrest he used to drink very heavily." That is what I have heard. There is nothing more I have to say on Gendün Chompel.   

**Q:**  Are there any other important persons that you knew around this time among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>?   

**A:**  I really didn't know many kudrak. I knew a little bit about Bönshö.   

**Q:**  When did he become a shape?   

**A:**  I don't know when he became a shape, but it was during Reting's Regency.   

**Q:**  Do you know about any incidents that took place among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>? Some troubles, like, for example, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] dispute, etc.?   

**A:**  I have nothing to tell you about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, but maybe among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> we had some troubles.   

**Q:**  Did you have any experiences with problems among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> that required you to go to Lhasa to solve the problem by mediation?   

**A:**  I did. For example, there was one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> called Nuba Labrang [Tib. ནུབ་པ་བླ་བྲང] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Thil. It was a rich labrang having two incarnate lamas. Two lamas were there at the same time, but the senior lama did not remain a celibate monk, so he was no longer a monk. The junior lama was born in the house where there was one tsendrön who had lost his celibacy and had gotten demoted. He was nicknamed Captainla because he looked like a Nepalese Captain. Since the senior lama was no longer a monk, he could no longer stay in the Labrang. So the Drigung Labrang intervened and told him, "Since you are no longer a monk, the wealth of the labrang should not be used for worldly secular affairs [i.e., for you support as a layman]. You should repent and then take your vows again and re-enter the monastery." This was the judgment given by Drigung Labrang. Drigung Labrang ordered him to do a three-year retreat and then re-enter as a monk. However, that lama couldn't remain as a monk anymore. The second time he tried he also fell [wasn't celibate]. At that time he wanted to take a share from the labrang [for his use]. When he wanted to take this, the family of the other lama who was very young naturally interfered. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Captainla on the young incarnation's side also happened to be Drigung Labrang's trustee (tsondzin). He [the senior lama], therefore, had no alternative but to challenge the younger one. What he did was to offer all the property of Nupa Labrang to Drepung's Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen [to get it out of the control of the younger lama's family]. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧར་གདོང་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) found in both Drepung and Sera Monasteries.">Hamdong Khamtsen</a> officials came to Drigung and said that Hamdong would like to take over the Nuba Labrang's properties, estates, etc. So then we had this law case. Hamdong Khamtsen came with a letter from the senior lama saying, "All my properties have been offered to Hamdong." This, naturally, was not acceptable to Drigung Labrang, so the law case was brought before the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> office." Drigung Labrang would say, "This is one of Drigung Thil's labrangs so Hamdong Khamtsen has no business to interfere in this." This was explained. As far as Hamdong was concerned, the owner of the labrang was that Rimpoche. He was the senior one, so since he has given it as an offering to us, we have the right to be here." This was the way the case developed.   

**Q:**  For how long?   

**A:**  It went on for three years, for over three years.   

**Q:**  What was there to argue about for over three years?   

**A:**  It was not so easy. Once you filed a law case with the government, then it was not easy to settle it. In the end, it was settled about the time when the Dalai Lama left for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> [end of 1950]. At that time, the acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> was Thubden Sangye [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་སངས་རྒྱས]. He was the laja and also the acting drunyichemmo. He gave a judgment, not an official judgment, but his personal judgment that the case should be settled amicably.   

**Q:**  How was it done?   

**A:**  I went to Lhasa at that time. Before that there had been one judgment which was also not an official one. One of the individual <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> gave a judgment which was not agreed to. This judgment said, "A certain amount of property has to be split off from Nuba Labrang and given to the senior lama. As for the junior lama who was recognized and born at Gatro Khangsar [Tib. དགའ་སྤྲོ་ཁང་གསར] in the family of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Captain la, it was said that he was not the true incarnation. Therefore, you should do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery in front of the Avalokitsevara statue in the Potala. [to see if he was genuine]" This was not acceptable to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Labrang. So we had to submit a petition saying that it was not acceptable to Drigung Labrang because those 30 Lamas of Drigung who were said to be the 30 disciples [Tib. བུ་སློབ] were recognized by the Drigung Kyamgön and the government, the Dalai Lama. Nobody else's approval was ever asked before. As for this incarnation, he was recognized and confirmed when Kyamgön Shiwei Lodrö [Tib. ཞི་བའི་བློ་གྲོས] was alive. Therefore, this is not acceptable to Drigung Labrang. So they continued to argue on this point. Finally a settlement was reached through Thubden Sangye, who was the acting drunyichemmo at the time when the Dalai Lama was in Yadong. After many discussions and one argument after another, the decision came as follows, "As for the junior lama, you do not need to do senriy and he can be the lama as before. As for the senior lama who left, to him the Nuba Labrang has to give every year 200 or 300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> grain as salary and also 40 or 50 khe of butter and all other necessary items and cash worth 200 dotse. The junior lama will have the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> for the time being. But since he is too young, as far as the administration of the Nuba Labrang is concerned, it has to be looked after jointly by Drigung Labrang as well as by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧར་གདོང་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) found in both Drepung and Sera Monasteries.">Hamdong Khamtsen</a> until he reaches the age of 20. After the age of 20, whether the two lamas would stay together or separate whatever they do, both of them would be more mature, so they can discuss and decide by themselves. Drigung Labrang and Hamdong Khamtsen should withdraw their interference when the young lama becomes 20 years of age." Finally, Hamdong Khamtsen came up to Drigung and Drigung Labrang and Hamdong Khamtsen went through the Nuba Labrang's property and listed it all. As far as the salary that they had to give the senior lama, that should be done directly by the Labrang. That was decided and then there was 20 years to wait.   

**Q:**  When the price of commodities rose, how did that affect the public? Did it cause much hardship to the public?   

**A:**  Yes, people had a very hard time. However, normally the necessary commodities didn't go up that much.   

**Q:**  How did people of Lhasa spend their lives? How did they get their money to live? How did they get their money for food? Where did they get it and how did they earn it?   

**A:**  The better, well-off people had land somewhere. Other people did some petty business. Some of them did handicrafts, carpentry, tailoring, etc. There were not really any definite categories as to how they earned their living. Many government officials had their own estates or salary estates [land from which they earned their living]. Businessmen went all over. Many people were working for them. This is how the people in Lhasa spent their lives.   

**Q:**  Do you consider that the majority of people in Lhasa were business people?   

**A:**  Most of them did business, doing one thing or another. Most of the people bought some small things such as tea, little pieces of cloth, different colored cloth, in Lhasa and tried to distribute it in the various villages. Even dyes and glass bangles, etc. They bought them and then distributed them in the villages. And even if the villagers didn't have money to pay at that time, during the autumn [after the harvest] they collected a little bit of grain here and there. This is how the majority of the real Lhasa people lived.   

**Q:**  Of course the villagers, the farmers, lived through their land and the nomads lived by means of their animals.   

**A:**  If you differentiate very carefully among the people of Lhasa, you will find that the real Lhasa native people were rare. Most of the people had parents who came from Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> or somewhere else and then they stayed in Lhasa. Some people came from the villages and stayed in Lhasa. Most of them were like that. It was very rare to find real native Lhasa people. Some did construction work.   

**Q:**  How much did the construction workers get for wages?   

**A:**  Probably, about 3-4-5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> per day.   

**Q:**  This was not a lot, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Some people also sold a little bit of food, like snacks and so on.   

**Q:**  Since most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> had estates, they lived on that and when these families split up, they would divide the estates, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is there a thing called a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མ་གཞིས] An estate that passes matrilineally (from mother to daughter).">mashi</a> [Tib. མ་གཞིས] (mother's estate)? Did the daughters have any sort of salary estates?   

**A:**  I don't think they had salary estates, but I heard there was something like mashi. I don't know where or how it came about.   

**Q:**  For example with Ngabö, they didn't have the main person from Ngabö, both of them were from outside [the family], right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was said that to the bride or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> who came to a household, all the property including the broom behind the door would belong to him or her. [Note: What follows was not on the tape] Regarding the dispute in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> family, Shatra Kungö told me personally about this. I am not too clear about the background. The family had the famous Shatra Lönchen [Tib. བློན་ཆེན] and another brother, Shatra Shape. The grandfather of the present Shatra Ganden Paljor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར] was the famous Shatra Lonchen who was appointed as minister (Lönchen) either by the 13th Dalai Lama or by Reting. Actually he was appointed by the 13th Dalai Lama, but he could not take the position as he died. When he died, the son, the present Ganden Paljor, was very young. They had a daughter called Lhayönla [Tib. ལྷ་ཡོན་ལགས]. I think Lhayönla was the daughter of Shatra Shape, the other brother, the brother of Ganden Paljor's father. Lhayönla was quite senior. She got married to Chapa Rusur [Tib. ཆ་པ་རུ་ཟུར], who happened to be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son. They argued and wanted almost 50% of Shatra's property. Shatra was one of the most important benefactors of Tsongkhapa in 1357 (Tsongkhapa passed away in 1419.) Thereafter, he continued sponsoring the Mönlam as well as Sera, Drepung, and Ganden. All the three great monasteries had offerings from the Shatra family almost every month. He was considered to be one of the most important benefactors of the Gelugpa sect. Above all Shatra was one of the major benefactors of Ganden monastery. Because of all this, the Shatra family had a lot of commitments to give. However Lhayönla wanted to take 50% of the Shatra family's property and go away. All the commitments to the monasteries they wanted to have done by Shatra himself. That son was very young, but then the Shatra family had very strong managers, well-known managers, like Chandzö Gyala [Tib. རྒྱལ་ལགས], etc. What Shatra Sey told me was that Gyala used to take care and teach this little son and mother how to go and talk to those ministers. To go and meet them personally. He used to teach him, "Shatra is not an ordinary family. It is a family that has a full commitment for Tsongkhapa and his followers in the three great monasteries as well as a commitment for the Mönlam. If the property of the Shatra is divided, then this commitment must be divided otherwise there is no way Shatra could meet these obligations." Also he used to say, "There is no woman who can become the head of the family. That will never happen. The son is always greater, so of course the son has to be the head." These were the arguments he taught the mother as well as the son. He used to send them around and sometimes he even used to go with them and talk. Of course when he went and talked with them, many people didn't like it. Mainly it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> Shape who never liked it when Gyala came to talk to them because Bönshö found it difficult to counter what Gyala said. However, Bönshö was very strongly supportive of Lhayönla. I don't know the reasons behind that, but he used to support her firmly. Then there were other cases where Lhayönla tried to do black magic against the Shatra family, etc. But that was a different matter that we need not mention here. On the other hand, Lhayönla also used to go round and meet the various government officials. They talked for a long time and finally, Shatra Kungö told me that Gyala used to say, "When I told the son, Seykusho [Tib. སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས] and the wife, Jamchung Gusho [Tib. ལྕམ་ཆུང་སྐུ་ཞབས] what to say, you should go and speak. When I go, they don't like it and they will tell us you are the servant so you are not concerned with this. It is a fight between the owners. Servants should not be involved. They told me that personally several times, so there was no way I can go with you. Though we have the truth on our side, there is nothing else to do but make offers to them to try to win by making offerings of money." That is what they did. They went and offered quite a lot of wool to Reting Rimpoche. Shatra said, "We used to pay our commitments every year even during the Reting trouble. We used to pay around 100 bales of wool to Reting Labrang even afterwards." Also one of the people from Shatra's estate was also given to Reting Rimpoche to get a favorable judgment, because Shatra had no chance of getting support from the Kashag because of the views of Bönshö Shape. Very cleverly, the manager, Gyala, offered one big estate to Reting Rimpoche in writing [for a favorable decision]. Shatra also had a man working inside Reting Labrang who was a friend of Nyungne Lama who helped them. On the other hand, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was also very close to Shatra. When Taktra was poor and was going round doing government functions, Shatra used to provide him with horses and shetuls [??] and even sometimes with servants. It was almost like a family relationship. They had a very close disciple-priest relationship. Taktra even tried to see Reting to get a favorable decision for Shatra. However, Reting decided the dispute on his last night in office. The principals were called to Reting's summer cottage, Trokhang [Tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> [in Lhasa] at night. In front of Shatra's Gyala and Shatra Seykusho and the mother, Reting Rimpoche showed the proposal of the Kashag [sent to him for final approval as Regent]. It gave 50% and all the best estates to Lhayönla. The Shatra religious commitments had to meet totally by Shatra. This was the proposal put forth by the Kashag. Reting Rimpoche got red ink and crossed everything out and almost redrafted it. Finally he said, "Lhayönla should get the small estate called Tashigang. That was the decision he gave. Then Reting Rimpoche said, "This was done not in view of the gifts that you have promised. The gifts were also equally promised from the other side. However, it was done in keeping with the fact that Reting Labrang had a close relationship with the Shatra family. Not only that, it was done keeping in mind the value of the Shatra family from Tsongkhapa onwards. This is also my last day in office, so I have no regrets." That was what he told Shatra. Then they [Shatra] offered the estate that was promised and he accepted it. However, when they looked at the estate's land tenure document, the government, I think the 7th Dalai Lama had written that it was meant for Ganden monastery (a lot of Shatra's offerings were meant for Ganden) so "The government cannot take this. Not one can transfer this to anybody, etc." All these type of things were written at the end. Then Reting said, "Now what to do?" Gyala kept quiet and said: "la, la, la. (yes, yes, yes)" In that way they did not even lose that estate. That is what Shatra told me. It was the last decision he made in the office. end of note]   

**Q:**  What points did the girl argue?   

**A:**  The girl was saying that girls have equal rights in the family. Since the son was very young, she should be the head of the family. She was given a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> and the magpa should be the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Kungö.   

**Q:**  Was she going out of the family?   

**A:**  No, no she was not going out. She was staying and bringing in a magpa. They even tried to get married in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>, but Shatra refused and didn't let them get married. They had trouble and even guns were fired. It was now in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s period. Before she was moved out, she wanted to get married in Shatra's house. They almost arranged it, even a man came with a gun. I don't remember exactly, the man got upstairs and shot a gun. When they did it, Shatra sent somebody to call the [police] shengo. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> came but before he came Lhayönla went down to meet the Shengo, etc. Finally Lhayönla was able to convince the shengo, and the shengo arrested Gyala and took him away. The man with the gun was there, but he and Gyala went alone. Finally Gyala was going to be lashed by the shengo. At that time, Shatra ran to Taktra Chandzö Chemmo with whom he was very close. He walked in to Chandzö Chemmo's room and said, "Gyala was taken, etc." Taktra's Chandzö Chemmo said that didn't matter much. When he was waiting, he served him tea. There was one servant of Gyala who also was in Chandzö's room and he started talking to Chandzö Chemmo saying, "Please do something, otherwise Gyala is about to be whipped." Then Chandzö Chemmo immediately called someone, some monk from Drepung, and sent that monk over to the shengo. What Gyala had said was that some monk came and started looking around and then he whispered something in the Shengo's ear and told Gyala to go quickly. He told him, "Get out of here, quickly" and he pushed Gyala out of there quickly. Finally, they learned that if Shengo would have lashed Gyala, then Lhayönla would have paid 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> to the shengo. That was the promise. Those things he had learned. That is what I remember.   

**Q:**  What was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>'s age?   

**A:**  He was young. Now he is in his fifties so at the time of the decision he was around 10, 11. [...unclear short section...]   

