# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0201.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Könchok Samden [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** June, 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Könchok Samden [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 62  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Könchok Samden [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན] was an official of the Drigung Labrang in Tibet. In this interview, he talks about the 13th Dalai Lama's death and the close relationship between Reting, Drigung Labrang and his father. The interviewee discusses Trimön's mental illness, the Panchen Lama's return to Tibet and trade, taxes and nomad groups in the north of Tibet. In addition, he talks of the arrival of the new 14th Dalai Lama in Nagchu, and gives a very detailed account of the Khyungram incident and the manner in which Drigung Labrang functioned and how the new incarnations were discovered after the death of Drigung Kyamgön Rimpoche. Lastly he explains the system of appointing gembo (headmen).   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0201_01/H_0201_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  [Note: Gelek Rimpoche gives Könchok Samden a long introduction to the interview that is not translated.] Where were you when the 13th Dalai Lama died? How old were you when this happened?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa at this time but I was very young. I was in school when I heard about it. I remember everyone was in a mourning mood, but I have no detailed knowledge about it.   

**Q:**  At that time, in which school were you studying?   

**Q:**  I was studying in the Darpoling School [Tib. dar po gling ?]. The teacher was the clerk in the Agriculture Office called Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན].   

**Q:**  How did you feel and react when you first heard the news? Do you remember anything unusual at the time?   

**A:**  When people heard the news, there was utter despair all around. There were strong feelings and signs of distress. People pulled down the prayer flags from the housetops and women wore white woolen ribbons in their hair and took off their aprons. At this time, any kind of colorful dress was avoided.   

**Q:**  Do you remember how long this mourning lasted?   

**A:**  I do not remember how long it lasted.   

**Q:**  After the demise of the 13th Dalai Lama, there arose some trouble about Kyamgön Chetsang Shiwey Lodrö and others. Do you remember anything about that?   

**A:**  I don't remember anything in detail. As far as I can remember, at the time there was a lot of criticism against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> and others because the wrong medicine was given by asking a deity to go into a medium's trance and also improper medical care being given to the Dalai Lama. Anyway, the talk was about such matters. I was too young at that time to understand anything, but that kind talk was in the air.   

**Q:**  What can you say about the Dr. Champala [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ལགས] and his role at the time? It is said that he was the doctor who offered the medicine to the Dalai Lama during his illness.   

**A:**  As I told you before, I don't remember anything in detail or the facts, but the rumors talked about some sort of wrong medicine being given and that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> was to blame. That kind of talk was there.   

**Q:**  Did you at that time know about the Tsondu meeting or about how the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment was destroyed, etc.? Do you remember anything about this?   

**A:**  I don't remember much because I was too young at that time. I do remember that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment [literally means "better household" regiment] was first established because some people from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང], the place where I was born, who were probably kind of rich came to Lhasa to join the army. At that time, I remember that it appeared that they preferred not to get admitted in the Drongdrag Regiment, so even though they were rich and had good clothes, when they went to present themselves [for visual inspection], they tried to appear as bad as possible by wearing inferior clothes and leaving their golden earrings home and wearing brass earrings instead. That is all that I can remember.   

**Q:**  Don't you remember anything about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment?   

**A:**  I just remember that after 3-4 years the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment kind of scattered and it looked like the soldiers asked for leave and went for vacations and then didn't come back.   

**Q:**  After the death [of the 13th Dalai Lama], Reting Rimpoche became the Regent. Did you remember hearing anything about how Reting became the Regent-- [things like] Reting is young and that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a> should become the Regent and why didn't Phurbujog [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་ལྕོག] become the Regent?   

**A:**  I don't remember clearly, but I had heard that one year before the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, he went to Reting and at that time probably they had a talk about Reting being appropriate [to become the Regent], but in general it was also approved through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> divination that Reting should become the Regent. It was assumed that during this meeting, His Holiness and Reting had internal talks about the imminent demise of his Holiness. So it was kind of marvelous because when the Dalai Lama was alive he had kind of wondrous thoughts and met Reting and gave him much prestige. But in general, Reting might not have been the proper or right candidate because of his age.   

**Q:**  Could you tell me about your father or what your father told you at that time?   

**A:**  I was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> at that time. As a school kid, I spent most of my time going to Drigung and coming back to Lhasa. At that time, the 13th Dalai Lama had gone to Reting and the head of Drigung Kyamgön Chetsang Shiwey Lodrö [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་སྐྱབས་མགོན་ཆེ་ཚང་ཞི་བའི་བློ་གྲོས] had a friendly relationship since the 13th Dalai Lama hailed from the Dakpo region. So Drigung Kyamgön Chetsang Shiwey Lodrö invited the 13th Dalai Lama to visit Drigung while on his way to meet Reting. However, due to the poor condition of the road to Drigung, he couldn't come. Consequently, as custom demanded, Drigung Kyamgön felt he should go and see the 13th Dalai Lama. My father also went with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> called Nangsel Trülku [Tib. སྣང་གསལ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] even though he did not hold any official post [in the labrang]. The only reason my father went was that Reting and my family had a priest-patron relations stemming from their previous incarnations in past generations.   

**Q:**  Do you mean when Reting came to become the Regent?   

**A:**  No. It was when the 13th Dalai Lama went to Reting. There is not much distance between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> and Reting. One is located at the upper part of the river valley and the other at the lower part.   

**Q:**  What was the reaction of the school children to the news of the death of 13th Dalai Lama? Do you remember how the children reacted at the time? Were they happy because the school was closed?   

**A:**  Yes, the school children at first seemed to be superficially kind of happy because of the closure of the school, but the fact remained that all the school children were in a very gloomy mood and dared not to play games, etc. In short, everybody appeared to be extremely sad, especially because the school children were too young to understand the reincarnation beliefs of the Tibetan people. As for the elders, they viewed this death as a mere change in the physical form of the 13th Dalai Lama who would be reborn as the next Dalai Lama. So the immediate impact of the news on the school children was so large that we still remember to this day the memory of those tragic days.   

**Q:**  What do you remember about the enthronement of Reting Rimpoche?   

**A:**  I don't remember that.   

**Q:**  Reting Rimpoche was enthroned a few months or so following the death of the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama passed away on the 30th of the 10th month of the Tibetan calendar. Reting Rimpoche came to the throne in the Wood-Dog Year (in 1934) on the 10th day of the first month of the Tibetan calendar. Hence, Reting came to the throne just a few months after the demise of the 13th Dalai Lama and perhaps the mourning period was not over. At that time, Reting and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> worked together jointly in the capacity of the Regent and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> respectively. At this time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> issue came up and Lungshar formed the Kyichog Kündün [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] Party. And also the talk of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and the arrest of Lungshar came up. So could you tell me what you remember about these events?   

**A:**  I have nothing special to say on this issue except what I heard from other people when I was a child. What really led to the arrest of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> is not known to me but he was, at the time, accused of so much that it was felt that the penalty shouldn't be less than the death sentence. But for the death sentence to be issued, permission had to be sought from Reting Rimpoche and the Regent said that it didn't have to be that way so eventually his eyes were gouged out. Later, I heard that Reting felt very bad and felt that he shouldn't have been the person to pass sentence on Lungshar. Although Lungshar's crimes were so serious that his death could be demanded, Reting did his best to lower the sentence to only gouging out his eyes.   

**Q:**  We don't know the truth, but I heard recently from my relatives that at that time when the death sentence was made, my late father talked with Silön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a>. Reting Rimpoche was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ] [the private house of the Reting Labrang in Lhasa]. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a>? probably insisted quite a lot [to approve the death sentence], so Reting felt inconvenient and he called my late father. My father went through the secretariat of the Reting Labrang on the west side and came into the room. At that time, the Reting was moving his mouth towards Langdün? was sitting on a chair and reading something turning his head towards the courtyard of Shide. Then Reting told Langdün? "Look! Mr. Prime Minister, your maternal uncle (Tib. Ashangla [ཨ་ཞང་ལགས]) has come." Then he [Reting] showed the plan of the death sentence to my father and when he saw the paper, Reting asked my father, "Rimpoche! Is this what should be done? [Tib. དེ་འདྲ་ཡོད་རེད་པས]" My father responded, "This should not happen at all. Firstly, Reting is a lama and secondly, because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was a person trusted by the 13th Dalai Lama, these should be properly considered." Then Langdün over and said "This is the result of a lama being a king. Asang, you have no reason to interfere." Then he snatched the paper from my father's hand. Later, a verdict was given that it was not appropriate to pass such a sentence especially when the next reincarnation of the Dalai Lama had not yet been discovered because it will have a bad effect. But when Langdün was reminded later on, he said that he did not act on his own, but rather it was like the proverb, "A fox has to cry when the ghost slaps him" [Tib. ཝ་མེ་བརྒྱལ་ཀ་མེད་འདྲེའི་འགྲམ་ལྕག] because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön requested him to do that. That is the sort of thing I have heard. Do you know about these things?   

**A:**  Yes. What you said makes sense, because that is the internal or the private level of talks and what I heard was the talk in the alleys. We heard that the Tsondu had decided on the death sentence and Reting changed the sentence to taking out his eyeballs. Reting didn't have any personal reason for his leniently. He had just come on the throne and had no reasons or experience in giving such a sentence. It was also circumstantial that the matter had come up at this time. The difference is some of this talk was on a private level and others were on a more public scale, but basically they are almost the same.   

**Q:**  Did you know about the Kyichog Kündün Party led by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  No, I didn't know anything about that.   

**Q:**  Do you remember anything about the arrest of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and the taking out of his eyes?   

**A:**  I don't remember anything about that.   

**Q:**  Who was in charge of building the golden tomb of the 13th Dalai Lama where his remains were kept?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  Do you remember the Guomindang Chinese who came to Lhasa to pay homage at the death of the 13th Dalai Lama? It was said that they went to all the mountains and offered alms at the Mönlam Prayer Festival.   

**A:**  Yes. I just heard that Chinese officers came and offered alms at the Mönlam, but we did not know about the implications of this visit.   

**Q:**  I don't want you to talk about the implications. At that time, did they offer huge alms at the Mönlam?   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  Didn't they go to other monasteries like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  Didn't they also go to the small monasteries like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> [Tib. རྨེ་རུ] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a>?   

**A:**  I don't have any special things to tell you about this, but those monasteries were included in the M?m.   

**Q:**  Do you remember that when the Chinese gave alms, that the British in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</a> also gave alms. But did the Indians also do something?   

**A:**  I don't remember that.   

**Q:**  Now, let's see. At that time you must have been around eight or nine years old. At that time one important event that took place was the revolt of Pandatsang. Do you remember anything about that?   

**A:**  Yes. I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> rebelled against the government and their house in Lhasa was sealed. I was in school at the time. Everyone was asking why so many soldiers were seen in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street and two or three days later his whole house was surrounded by army troops and their gate was closed shut. Then again one day later it was said that the soldiers tried to get through the window and a gun was shot from inside. This continued for a few days. Our late teacher, who probably inquired about these happenings from others, said that some kind of negotiations were going on and later they agreed to surrender all the arms and ammunition. Anyway, it soon calmed down. I was in Lhasa at that time.   

**Q:**  Do you remember what happened after that?   

**A:**  I don't remember.   

**Q:**  When did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> resign?   

**A:**  I don't remember when he resigned. I don't know the date.   

**Q:**  Then Reting went to view the holy lake, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he did. He went through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> and then he went to Drigungthil [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་མཐིལ] and then Yangrigang [Tib. ཡང་རི་སྒང], and then to Metro Gongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར].   

**Q:**  How long did he stay in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>?   

**A:**  From Reting he came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Tse Phodrang [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་རྩལ་ཕོ་བྲང] and stayed there for one or two days. Later he went to Drigungthil and then to Yangrigang for one day and then he came back.   

**Q:**  Did you see Reting at the time?   

**A:**  Yes, but just as a [general] audience, because I was too young. At Drigungthil, Reting met Angön Lama and I heard that something marvelous happened at that time. Looking from one perspective, Angön was an unknowable person and looking from another perspective, he was kind of mad or eccentric and when he talked he just said the beginning without saying the end. That was his normal character.   

**Q:**  How old was Angön Rimpoche at that time?   

**A:**  I think he was eighty or ninety years old because when we asked the elders how old he was, they said, "We used to see him with white hair and a white beard when we were young." There weren't many people who could tell his age. From this we could see that he was eighty or ninety years old at the time. Angön Rimpoche was born in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Bamdo area. His generation had become extinct [all died], but he would go to his house once a year and make the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོག] 1. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone. 2. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together.">tshog</a> offering. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> living there in that house would serve him food on that day. When Reting came to Drigung, he went to see Angön Rimpoche in his retreat. His retreat house was a really a small room, but there was a small window through which visitors could talk and there was a door for bringing him food, but he would keep the door half barricaded. Actually, Angön Rimpoche should have paid his respects to Reting, but when Reting came to his small retreat room, Angön Rimpoche was not that attentive and gave the appearance that he felt strange and he just touched Reting's clothes and said, "Wow! How pretty these things are." After that, Angön gave an audience to the retinue and then when Reting went inside the room, Angön just stayed in the courtyard and didn't go in. And when he was told to go in, he said, "No, these tall people will break my floor." What he meant by tall people were the monk bodyguards of Reting who he thought would break his floor which was made from cow dung and earth. Then the bodyguards were told to go out and take a rest. After they assured Angön that the others wouldn't come inside, he went inside the room and met Reting and a servant. After that, the servant came out and said that while he was inside the room he behaved very normally and their meeting lasted almost an hour. I had been in his room. It had only a leather cushion and nothing else. He had Reting sit on the cushion and prostrated before him. Then they were served a pot of tea. After the meeting, Reting went to his camp in Drigung Shöl and on the next day, Reting sent my late father to invite Angön to come, but Angön declined, saying that he had nothing more to say because he had said everything during their meeting the day before. When others insisted, he still did not accept. I heard later Reting presented some gifts to Angön but he refused to accept them.   

**Q:**  Reting didn't go to see him again, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He might have had some more questions to ask, but he didn't get the chance to ask Angön.   

**Q:**  I heard that Reting sent a cup made from a jade-like stone and Angön didn't accept it, was that right?   

**A:**  Yes. Reting had asked Angön whether he wanted anything. Angön was kind of crazy and had this typical nature of saying that he wants this or that thing, etc. So Reting had sent a brand new cloak with a yellow serge outer lining. My father went to give it to Angön. Later, a pair of cups made from a jade-like stone [Tib. གཡང་ཏྲི] was sent through me. I went to him and told him that Reting had sent it to him. He said, "Was that the man who wears elegant satin clothes and has many men around him? Yes, I know him." Then he rubbed the cups for some time and said, "I don't want this." I said, "I swear by the Three Jewels that it is not okay for you to refuse it because Reting sent this to you." And I insisted that he must take it, but he then said, "Okay. Then you take one and I will keep the other. Let's divide them." I told him, "I swear by the Three jewels that I am not going to take it back because no one would believe that you had given it to me." So he got angry at this and said that he would break it and I said, "That is your choice but I won't take it back." So, finally he took it. Later on, I learned that he gave it to Kyamgön Chetshang Shiwei Lodrö  

**Q:**  Then Reting went to look at the holy lake, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you remember about the lake vision? Do you remember who the important government officials in Reting's retinue were while he was on his way back from the trip to see the divine revelation in the holy lake about the reincarnation of the 13th Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  I don't remember who was in the retinue.   

**Q:**  At that time, you might have been 11-12 years old right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What do you remember about the Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] monastery renovation?   

**A:**  After Reting came back to Lhasa from the lake vision, he didn't say anything about the vision, so people were saying surreptitiously that he didn't see anything in the lake. I don't know whether anybody asked him about it or not. Then, later on, it was said that the year before was a black or inauspicious year [Tib. ལོ་ནག] or a black or inauspicious month [Tib. ཟླ་ནག] so that is why he didn't revealed anything. But then during the New Year Celebration, he revealed the Chögorgyal's lake vision to the Tsondu. Then people started talking, saying that the lake vision was marvelous.   

**Q:**  What do you remember about the renovation work at Samye?   

**A:**  I heard that Samye got renovated, and that it was not only Samye Monastery, but several other monasteries like the four temples [Tib. རུ་གནོན་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] built during the era of King Songtsen Gambo [Tib. སྲོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ] [note: the four temples were: Tib. khams klong thang sgrol ma/ spa gro skye chu/ tshal rigs shes rab sgrol ma/ tshangs pa rlung gnon]. Metro Katsal [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་བཀའ་ཚལ] was also one of them and he also arranged for some rituals to be performed there regularly.   

**Q:**  As usual, several people were sent out to different places to locate the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama and we know who those people were. Now, I wonder where the Panchen Lama was at this time when they were searching for the reincarnation.   

**A:**  Probably, the Panchen was in China. I don't recall clearly.   

**Q:**  It used to be said that the Panchen Lama escaped to China and Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] chased him. When was this?   

**A:**  The Panchen went to China when the 13th Dalai Lama was alive. Regarding this, the people in (Lhasa) used to sing a song with the words, "The Panchen like a white vulture, flew high in the sky. Tsögo like a hound, sniffed and came back." [Tib. པན་ཆེན་ཐང་དཀར་ཡིན་ཟེར། ནམ་འཕངས་བཅད་ནས་ཕེབས་སོང། མཚོ་སྒོ་ཤ་ཁྱི་ཡིན་ཟེར། དྲི་མ་མནམས་ནས་ལོག་བྱུང] [Tsögo was the official sent to catch the fleeing Panchen but he failed and returned empty-handed]. So the people in Lhasa started singing this song.   

**Q:**  The Panchen was later invited to Tibet. Was it the Regent Reting who sent the invitation or someone else?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether it was Reting, who invited him, but it was thought to be very important to call the Panchen to Tibet and people went to invite him and there were many in the retinues. I remember that many camels also arrived in Lhasa and it was said that they were loaded with the things of Tashilhunpo. They arrived up to Nagchu. Later, I heard that the Panchen was told to come, but not to bring a large number of Chinese bodyguards with him, but from the Panchen's side, it was felt that the Chinese guards must be present because they had doubts [about the Tibetan government]. This decision regarding the retinue of the Panchen took some time to be decided and in the meantime, the Panchen passed away.   

**Q:**  When people heard that the Panchen was being invited to Tibet, what was the reaction of the people at that time? Were the people glad or were they not glad? Or were they kind of inattentive, taking it in a very casual way, like saying that the camels have arrived and so on.   

**A:**  I can not precisely remember the reaction of the people at that time, but it seems that they didn't have much faith and respect [Tib. དད་དད་མོས་མོས] towards the Panchen.   

**Q:**  What was their attitude? Did they regard him like some high lama, like Traya Kyamgön [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་སྐྱབས་མགོན], coming?   

**A:**  Yes. The appearance was that the Panchen's reincarnation didn't have many signs manifested and the Panchen used to be called Ertini [Mong. er ti ni] and it seemed like a Chinese name and looked as if he had been made in China and later sent to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Basically, the Panchen was accorded a reception from the government of Tibet but the problem was the 500 Chinese guards. They could not decide whether these 500 Chinese bodyguards would be allowed to come with the Panchen or not.   

**A:**  Probably it was like that. I also heard that.   

**Q:**  After the death of the Panchen, what happened to those people who were with him? It seems that some of them did go to Tibet.   

**A:**  Yes, probably some of them did. The Panchen had arrived at Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ], and from there he may have gone up or down or to some other places, but finally it seems he passed away at Jyekundo itself. By that time, the communists were rising up. As a rule, after the death of the Panchen, his followers should have made an effort to locate the reincarnation of the Panchen because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> was still there, but in this case after the death of Panchen, the whole issue sort of disappeared.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that the time of the Communist's Long March [Tib. གུང་ཕྲན་རྒྱང་སྐྱོད] when they first arrived in Kham?   

**A:**  Probably, it was.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese arrive at several places like Litang and Horkhok at this time?   

**A:**  It was said that the Panchen's officials were not good, though I don't have any particular person to mention.   

**Q:**  In 1937, the Tibetan year of the Fire Ox, the resignation of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was accepted. Do you recall anything about Trimön It was said that Trimön was slightly mentally ill and he wore a white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] The lower part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">shamtab</a> and shawl. Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes. I didn't hear about him wearing a shawl, but I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was going around the Wongtölinga [Tib. འོང་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག] market with one or two servants. I can not precisely say whether Trimön was related to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Rimpoche or not, but he was definitely on good terms with Drigung Labrang. The 13th Dalai Lama and the former Drigung Kyamgön Chetshang Shiwei Lodrö were related to each other and he used to exchange letters with the Dalai Lama. At that time the officials of Drigung Labrang were not so well educated so as to be able to write an official letter in a fitting manner, so the letters that were sent to the Dalai Lama were later corrected by the Dalai Lama with red ink regarding the spelling and the wording, and then were sent back to Drigung Labrang along with his answer to the letter. At that time, among the staff of Drigung, there was a person called Chagdrung [Tib. ཕྱག་དྲུང] who used to copy scriptures. He was one of the hermits of Drigungthil and he was regarded as the best in writing. Later, when the Dalai Lama made the corrections, people came to know that he was not that good in writing. In this way, the Dalai Lama was especially kind to the Drigung Kyamgön? At this time Drigung Kyamgön went to have an audience with His Holiness. At that audience Trimön was also present. Normally, when Drigung Kyamgön went to Lhasa, he stayed in Trimön House.   

**Q:**  What was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s character like? Was he a kind of calm and gentle person? Or was he a kind of stern person?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this.   

**Q:**  You didn't have much contact with him, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I didn't have any contact with him. I just knew that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> had a close relationship. After that, as I told you before, Trimön had mental problems and went to the market.   

**Q:**  Normally, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> would not go to the market, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably, there wasn't any custom of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> going to the market.   

**Q:**  They would have to stay inside in an imposing manner, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but at that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was unconcerned and went to the market. I also heard that later Trimön's wife had some mental problems.   

**Q:**  Do you remember when some foreigners come to Lhasa and the monks threw stones at them?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this.   

**Q:**  Didn't you hear anything about the monks stoning the Germans during the Mönlam Torgya [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་གཏོར་རྒྱག]?   

**A:**  Oh yes. Probably that was the time when I was in Lhasa. I remember that during the Torgya exorcism ceremony there was a lot of commotion among the crowd of people there. The monks threw stones and I remember that I couldn't find a way to run away.   

**Q:**  At that time they stoned the Germans and there was a war going on in China, the war of Liu Zhuxi of Xikang. Do you remember whether the Panchen Lama's body was brought to Tibet?   

**A:**  I don't know about that, but I remember that the Panchen Lama would grant favors to my late father. At that time my father was doing trading for the Döntsang [Tib. འདོད་ཡོན་ཚང] family and he went to Shigatse and Kham and acquainted himself with the rich and high families like Lakhatsang [Tib. ལ་ཁ་ཚང] and Jangtsatsang [Tib. འཇང་ཚ་ཚང], etc. At that time our house was opposite Lakhatsang's house in Lhasa. Later, my father used to ride trotting gait horses and he was a favorite of the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  Was the late Panchen Lama fond of horses?   

**A:**  Yes, probably.   

**Q:**  Reting was also fond of horses, so they might be the same?   

**A:**  Yes, when the Panchen Lama was about come to Jyekundo, my late father received a letter to come to Jyekundo. The Panchen Lama told my father that if he had any financial problems [to do this], he could get money from the [Panchen's official] Tsagserkhang [Tib. རྩག་སེར་ཁང] and I remember that Tsagserkhang also came to our house and I remember my father preparing to go. I remember this sort of thing.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> resigned in 1938, the Earth-Tiger year of the Tibetan calendar. Do you remember the events during the finding of the Dalai Lama's reincarnation?   

**A:**  I don't remember much, but at the time everybody including the children were talking about the lake vision when the three letters 'A'; 'KA'; 'MA' appeared and that this indicated that the direction in which the new reincarnation was to be born was in Amdo.   

**Q:**  Even the children were talking about the three letters?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, among the candidates for the possible reincarnation of the Dalai Lama, there was the Minling Dungsey [Tib. སྨིན་གླིང་གདུང་སྲས] and another one from Kumbum and the present Dalai Lama. Do you remember this?   

**A:**  Yes, I also heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> was among the candidates and probably, there was one in Lhalu also.   

**Q:**  Yes, I also heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> had a son and that he was possibly the reincarnation. A horse from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> ran away to Langdün, at that time the Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, "It would be better to leave it in an appropriate manner." Did you hear that?   

**A:**  I didn't hear that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said that, but I heard about one candidate being born in Langdün. I also heard about the horse.   

**Q:**  Yes, later this candidate became Ditru Rimpoche [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག].   

**Q:**  Do you remember about the announcement of the discovery of the present Dalai Lama as the real reincarnation?   

**A:**  I don't remember the announcement, but when the Dalai Lama was brought to Lhasa I was at Nagchu. At that time I must have been around fifteen or sixteen years old.   

**Q:**  Why did you go to Nagchu?   

**A:**  I went to Nagchu on business. I was with my father and he was teaching me about business and writing letters because he was becoming old. I was 14 years old. The next year I was sent alone. And I also went to the Nagshib [Tib. ནག་ཤོད] area to collect some animals and do business. In Nagchu, I heard that the Dalai Lama had arrived and there would be a lot of people and good opportunities for business and we could also seek an audience. At that time, it appeared that they brought the Dalai Lama in a very secret and tense manner. In Nagchu, the house owners drove out the traders living in their houses and the traders lived in tents. On their houses, they stuck the names of the officials coming with the Dalai Lama. Then it was said that the previous night an official came and didn't get lodging and had to stay in the area near the main gate of the monastery [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] and one of the officials lost a saddle bag full of notes. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> [Tib. བོན་ཤོད]. Everyone was excited about the news and no one was in a sort of relaxed mood. In Nagchu, there was a scarcity of accommodations because so many people had come en route to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Had the new reincarnation been decided at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. It was already confirmed and all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> heads in the four areas of the north [Tib. བྱང་རིགས་སྡེ་བཞི] had gathered in Nagchu. It was said that everyone was going there to have an audience with the new Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Do you recall how the new Dalai Lama came to Nagchu and how he was received?   

**A:**  Yes, I remember seeing the Dalai Lama's parents on horseback and the new reincarnated Dalai Lama was in a special carriage carried on the back of a mule. There were two persons in the carriage, so everyone was guessing which one was the new Dalai Lama, the older one or the younger one. I think that the other one was Kungö Lobsang Samden [the Dalai Lama's older brother]. At Nagchu, they stayed for two days. A ceremony was held in a hall and we saw that the new Dalai Lama was wearing a new monk's robe with a cap and was walking. I remember that he waved his hand when he came in sight of the public. At that time I was in Nagchu doing business. When the Dalai Lama left Nagchu, he was carried in a sedan chair and I saw that many sedan carriers had arrived there.   

**Q:**  How was your business then and what business were you doing?   

**A:**  Business was good. I was buying butter and wool and then selling them in Lhasa. Right at that time, the traders from Siling [Xining] also arrived. Business people had a great time during that period. I stayed for a month at Nagchu after His Holiness left. I bought many swords; as many as my financial condition permitted. I bought about 32 swords, one trotting horse, three guns, etc. The mode of doing business at that time was paying in merchandise and then collecting wool and butter during the autumn. That was the kind of business I was doing. At that time, the people in Nagchu needed money for making the accommodation arrangements, so I paid them money.   

**Q:**  Where did you go from Nagchu?   

**A:**  I went further north to the places called Rusar [Tib. རུ་གསར] and Runying [Tib. རུ་གཉེར] to collect wool and butter.   

**Q:**  Where are these places located?   

**A:**  These places are located to the west of Nagchu. They were a two or three day journey from Nagchu.   

**Q:**  Were there good pastures in those areas?   

**A:**  Yes, I had many friends in those places. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a> (the chiefs) of those places were very close friends of mine. I had left animals on lease with them.   

**Q:**  Could you describe the structure and the conditions in those places?   

**A:**  Those places are among the four areas in the north and they were pastoral nomadic areas.   

**Q:**  Was it a small area?   

**A:**  Not really small, but they were nomads and were divided into groups each of which was situated at a distance of about a day's journey on horseback. Each group consisted of about 300 households. These groups were administered by a chief called Pöntsang [Tib. དཔོན་ཚང], and under him there were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> [Tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡིང་དཔོན] A non-commissioned military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of 25 soldiers (a platoon). It is an alternative name for Shengo in the army.">dingpön</a> [Tib. ལྡིང་དཔོན] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅུ་དཔོན] 1. A minor military officer in charge of a squad of ten troops in the traditional Tibetan Army. 2. A minor official.">jupön</a> [Tib. བཅུ་དཔོན]. Those were the names of the leaders in these places. In the Nagchu area there were only the pöntsang and gyagpön. In the lower areas, like in Nagshö when they were said to be part of China [Tib. རྒྱ་སྡེ], the Bhiku was the higher rank and the lower one was called Bhikyang. Later, when they belonged to Tibet, the higher one was called pöntsang and the lower one was called depöntsang.   

**Q:**  Did they have to pay taxes?   

**A:**  Yes. They had to pay the government tax called gangdro which included the taxes levied on corvée labor, for example, sending men and horses as corvee as well as pack animals for government officials. They also had to pay the langdün [Tib. ལག་འདོན] tax which consisted of taxes in-kind.   

**Q:**  What taxes did they have to pay in-kind?   

**A:**  For in-kind taxes they had to pay the tax called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཛོ] A cross between a yak and a cow/ox.">dzo</a>she [Tib. མཛོ་ཤེ] which was a tax levied because the government had leased them dzo in the past and they had to pay a fixed amount of butter annually regardless of whether the [original] animals died or gave new births [Tib. འཆི་མེད]. Then there was a tax called meshe [Tib. མེ་ཤེ] which was a tax levied because the government had probably provided them Tibetan guns and they had to pay a tax for that. At that time it was said that there were taxes levied on men, animals and land [Tib. ཀེར་སྒུར་ལེབ་གསུམ]. These were the taxes people had to pay. These taxes were collected annually by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> or the panopön [?] of each small group. They in turn further submitted them to the dzong. In the case of Nagchu, they were sent to Nagchu Dzong. From Nagchu Dzong they were sent finally to Lhasa and to the monasteries, etc.   

**Q:**  What did they have to pay? Money or butter?   

**A:**  There gave both money and butter.   

**Q:**  How much did they have to pay?   

**A:**  I can't say in detail. They had a way of counting the units of animals like horses and sheep and goats like we count 20 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྲེ] A unit of traditional volume measurement [a container] in Tibet, 20 of which typically equaled one khe or bo [also a container], although in some areas there were only 16 dre in one khe.">dre</a> for 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> and 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> for 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> [note: He is referring to the nomad's custom of converting animal numbers into "sheep equivalents," for example, one yak might be counted as 7 sheep]. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a> would count the taxes once every three years. At that time they would count the number of people, animals and the areas of the land for each household and make a record of it.   

**Q:**  But the taxes were collected every year by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [note: each household's taxes and pastures were reset every three years by first making a census and then reallocating pastures in accordance with the number of animals]   

**Q:**  Did the traders have to pay taxes on the goods they bought?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to pay taxes on wool. This was called phesho [Tib. བལ་ཤོ]. We also had to pay taxes on musk.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pay taxes when you bought or sold things, or did you just have to pay taxes if you transported them?   

**A:**  When we transported them we had to pay a customs tax [Tib. སྒོ་ཁྲལ]. No tax was levied on the person who sold the goods, but the buyers had to pay taxes when they transported them. When we reached a site, the [officials] would check what the traders had brought. There was a system called gyago [Tib. རྒྱ་སྒོ] [1%], which meant traders had to pay one load of tea if they had 100 loads of tea and probably, it was similar to the wool where the trader had to pay 1 bale if they had 100 bales of wool. Similarly, for musk, skins and yak tails, they also had to pay taxes. These taxes could be paid in money. There was no tax on butter. There was a tax on salt.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pay the taxes in Nagchu or in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I didn't have to pay taxes in Nagchu or even in Lhasa. I had to pay the taxes in Phari.   

**Q:**  So this was a custom tax paid at the border, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So if you bought things from Nagchu and sold them in Lhasa, there was no tax, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the past, the areas in the north, in Nagchu, were regarded as Tibetan territory (Tib. böde [བོད་སྡེ]), whereas the 39 tribes [Tib. ཧོར་ཚོ] in Nagsh?re regarded as Chinese territory (Tib. གྱདེ [རྒྱ་སྡེ]). However, among the latter, there were also Tibetan households [Tib. བོད་དུད] and Mongolian households [Tib. སོག་དུད] and also Chinese households, [Tib. རྒྱ་དུད] who would go up and down. The governor of the 39 tribes was the Horji. In that area, the salt and wool tax collectors would come from the Doji to T?ar and these custom officials were called Tsotö Tsasho [Tib. ཚོ་སྟོད་ཚྭ་ཤོ].   

**Q:**  Why didn't they send the tax collector from Lhasa?   

**A:**  That area was regarded as belonging to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Didn't T?ar belong to ??   

**A:**  Yes. According to the system of division [of Tibet] into three provinces, the territory below the Sogyag [Tib. སོག་གཡག] mountain pass was regarded as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྟོད] The Amdo region of Eastern Tibet.">dotö</a> above it was ütsang.   

**Q:**  There was the monastery called Sogtsendan [Tib. སོག་ཙན་དན] and a mountain pass called Sogla Gyawo [Tib. སོག་ལ་སྐྱ་བོ], right?   

**A:**  That monastery is on the other side of the Sogla Gyawo Pass. On this side there was the place where there were 9 mountain passes and 9 plains in Sog [Tib. སོག་ལ་དགུ་ཀླུང་དགུ]. The taxes for wool, salt, yak tails and musk bought in the Nagshö area were collected by the Tsotö Tsasho and it belonged to Chamdo. There was another custom's tax collector in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> called the Garjag Tsasho [Tib. སྒར་ལྕགས་ཚྭ་ཤོ] which was sent by the government to check the goods. First, the traders had to get a permit, a sort of a business pass, from the respective dzongs in which their business area fell. These business passes/permits clearly stated the exact amount of goods a person carried with him. In Drigung, if the check post found any extra goods not mentioned in the permit, then the trader had to pay more taxes for those goods.   

**Q:**  Were they very strict on that point?   

**A:**  No, it depended on the person in charge. If the person was strict then it was strict, and if not, then it was not so strict. If the person was very strict then he sometimes would say, "We would like to weigh all these loads because you may be overweight and may be carrying some extra things." They were quite tough. For the large business traders, the real big ones, for them it was a sort of easy to go through, because then there were many factors involved. These people [inspectors] were mainly for the northern nomads who had wool, butter, soda [Tib. བུལ་ཏོག], salt, skin, tails and all sorts of funny different types of items. They also was beef and mutton.   

**Q:**  Was there any tax for meat?   

**A:**  There was no tax for the meat, but whenever you slaughtered an animal you had to pay a certain tax.   

**Q:**  What kind of tax did they have to pay when they butchered one animal?   

**A:**  I am not sure exactly what it was, but I think it was about 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> and 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> for butchering one yak.   

**Q:**  Don't you think that was a bit high? How did the authorities come to know that you had animals to be slaughtered?   

**A:**  Those animals which were not meant for [taking somewhere such as Lhasa for] slaughtering were loaded with things like wool and other materials. Those that were meant to be slaughtered or sold for their meat were without any load. When there were animals without loads, they were taxed. This is how it functioned.   

**Q:**  What about other things. I heard you had to pay a tax for the ears of the animals (Tib. ཨམཏྲེ [ཨམ་ཁྲལ]) [a kind of head tax]. Was there such a thing?   

**A:**  Oh yes. That happened, but it was not meant to be collected every year. It was collected when there was trouble in the country. When the country faced problems, or when the defense of the country was involved, etc. In such times I heard that they would collect something called amtram [Tib. ཨམ་ཏྲམ], i.e., one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> for each ear. That was what I heard, but I never experienced it in my life.   

**Q:**  Was that one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> for human ears or was it for animals?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether it was for animals or human beings. It was called amtrang, so one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> for one ear. Probably everybody who had an ear had to pay, so it could be both, animals and human beings. As far as the business communities were concerned, the custom's tax had to be paid near the Indian border.   

**Q:**  Was it a large, heavy tax?   

**A:**  No. It was not at all a heavy tax. I don't remember exactly, but I think it was something like 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> and 5 sho. Something like that for one load of wool.   

**Q:**  Isn't that heavy, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> and 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>? Isn't that heavy? How much would the wool cost, if you had to pay a 1 sang and 5 sho tax?   

**A:**  One bale would probably be about 50-60-70 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>; around about that amount. It is light, because when we bought wool, for one kg of wool we would pay something like 3 sang or 3 sang and 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> or 4-5 sang. At that time I used to pay about that amount. A mound of wool had 40 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[Hindi. sihr] A weight unit equal to about 2.06 pounds.">seer</a> [1 seer   2.05 pounds]. When they were taking 1 sang and 5 sho, it meant they were only taking a half seer, so it was not heavy at all. Compared to the taxes later on in India, this was a very small amount.   

**Q:**  What type of business were you mainly doing since you bought largely wool and butter? Did you pay for them in cash or how did you do it?   

**A:**  Yes. The majority of the butter and wool was paid in cash. However, it depended on the area. [In some we gave] cotton cloth and woolen cloth material. We had to know what they needed, like yellow, red, green, and all the different multicolored cloth, as well as the woolen cloth for making clothes and boots. Also we gave woolen cloth with the spot design (Tib. ཏིངམ [ཐིག་མ]) for making boots. Also porcelain cups, things like that, it depended on the area.   

**Q:**  What did you do with those materials? Did you distribute them? What did you do?   

**A:**  When we reached there, suppose that there was a function in the monastery or something, then we went near the monastery and laid out our materials; or there was somebody to lay out the materials there and sell it. Whatever we could get. There were also wandering groups, what we call shoga. When the shoga wanted something, we gave them large quantities and then we would collect the butter or wool, whatever we wanted, whatever was needed.   

**Q:**  When you did this business, how much profit did you get? What percentage?   

**A:**  It depends on one's luck. For instance, as I mentioned to you earlier, in the yer when the Dalai Lama came, I had about 500, 600 mounds of wool. When I bought this wool in the Nagsh?ea, I got 1 mound of wool for about 40-50 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>. That very wool, when I brought it to Lhasa on yaks and from Lhasa to Phari on mules, for one mule load, I paid about 100 sangs for the transportation fee. From Phari to Kalimpong, we were paying something like 12 or 13 rupees per load as the transportation charge. When we reached Kalimpong, the total expenses, including the transportation charges and people going around with the animals, all expenses included, it cost something like about 100 sang in Kalimpong. When I was selling them in Kalimpong, I sold one load for 52 Rs and 8 anna. I got something like Rs. 60 for some part of my wool. It depended on the time of the arrival of the wool in Kalimpong. That is why it was different. At that time, the exchange rate for one rupee was like 7 sang. When this is multiplied, it became like 350 sang per load when we sold them in Kalimpong while my capital [expense] was like 100 sang. So it was a very good profit, but it took a lot of time. As I mentioned to you, it depended on luck. But as far as I was concerned, I really went down deep inside the roots [remote areas], wherever you could get wool. So I made better profit. If we sold the wool in Lhasa, we could get about 130-40 sang which was like 50% profit. Not only that, some people were even buying from Phari and selling in Phari and buying in Kalimpong and selling it in Kalimpong itself. Among the Tibetans, it was only the Rapomsasum [Tib. ར་སྤོམ་ས་གསུམ] who were the buyers. [Rapomsasum ] was the abbreviation of Reting, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> and Sandutsang. We didn't have others, but there were a lot of Indians, the Cayennes and Marwaris who were buying a lot of the things from the Tibetans who were there. They were buying in Kalimpong and they were selling in Kalimpong and they were doing quite a good business there too. Sometimes people had a tremendous amount of profit and sometimes you totally lost. Waiting for rising prices, you held it and you kept on holding it, but [sometimes] then you couldn't sell it. Then the wool got rotten and you totally lost. That happened to me that very year. Do there were traders who showed a loss. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> heads in Nagchu were a lay official and a monk official. They were called Khenang Nyi [Tib. མཁན་ནང་གཉིས]. It was said it was a nangso and another one.   

**Q:**  What is a nangso? Was it a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and a nangso?   

**A:**  Probably, nangso were monk officials. They didn't use the term khenjung. Anyway, there was one lay official and one monk official. At that time, the Dechang of Reting Labrang who called Simp? was one of the Nagchu Dzong heads. Something happened when I was seventeen years old. It was the first year I was sent alone by my father. What I did was that I used the money I got from Lhasa to pay for wool and other things. When the businessmen from Siling came, I had no money to pay. Then I went straight away to India to do business, as I mentioned before to you. I gave my father quite some hardship because he didn't have really that much money to pay in cash in Lhasa. He told me later, "You must be crazy. You should do business according to your own budget." My previous statement was wrong, because I did come to Lhasa just before the New Year and then I went straight to Kalimpong the day after New Year. It was something like that. When I reached Kalimpong, I was advised by Reting's Labrang's Simp?gain and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lo Gendün [Tib. བློ་དགེ་འདུན]. They guided me regarding whether the wool should be sold or not be sold and whether it should be sold today but not tomorrow, or should not be sold today but tomorrow. This sort of guidance was given to me by these two. The men of Reting Labrang in Kalimpong said, "Well, this is your first time so you should not have a big stomach, so it should be sold now." Then Sandu Lo Gendün, "You should hold it for awhile." Sort of in between that, a month passed. Then in about a month's time, Simp? told me, "Now you go, go, go, and sell it. Now you had better go and sell it. Now you will make a big profit." When I went then to Lo Gendün said, "It would be a good profit now, but still wait for a few days." All of a sudden, one morning, Lo Gendün in a car and told me, "Now you better run and sell it because the profit is going down." At that time, Sandu had the largest collection of wool out of the three Rapomsasum. They had communications coming from Delhi and Bombay. His people telephoned him and he got the information first, because he had the largest stock. I straight away ran to the market and there were two Marwaris. One said, 51 Rs and one said 51.5. Then I talked and talked, and after some time a price of 52 Rs was decided. At that time, the Tibetan wool was tied with a piece of leather strap. We decided not to remove that leather strap but to weigh it with it on. I went early in the morning at about sunrise, and a little after me, Tshatru Panden Drakpa [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང་དཔལ་ལྡན་གྲགས་པ], who was a very, very rich businessman, followed me, He was on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> side and sold their wool in the afternoon by removing the leather strip. He got only 52 Rs. Then within a day or two, it became 51 and a few days later it was 50 and it went down. After a while it went up and it went into the sixties. So I was able to sell the second part of the load in the sixties, when it arrived.   

**Q:**  Tell me whether the people living in Kalimpong at that time took any interest in the political activities in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, they didn't really. The people didn't have much interest at all. In those days we didn't have much interest. Nowadays, whether we have responsibility or not, but we have to talk about governmental affairs, political activities, etc. We have to listen and we have to talk. Nowadays we have to do that. At that time, this type of atmosphere never developed. In those days, the majority of the people in Kalimpong didn't take such an interest. At that time, it was the responsibility of the government. People talked about their business and the business people talked about their business deals. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> people [the peasants] will talk about their taxes. That is about all. Nobody knew anything more.   

**Q:**  At that time, the traders only had to pay the custom taxes, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Please tell me about the system where families with 3 sons had to make one of them a monk?   

**A:**  I think it was a personal affair. It was not a rule laid down by the government, etc. It was the individual family who when they had three sons sent the middle one to a monastery because if they all stayed in their respective houses, they would have financial problems meeting their living expenses. Therefore it was normal to send one of the sons to the monastery. This is my guess, but it was definitely not a government order.   

**Q:**  Since you had a lot of experience in dealing with taxes, if one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> would like to become a monk, wouldn't he have to get the ch? from whomever?   

**A:**  Yes, that was necessary. If you wanted to become a monk, you couldn't do that without having the ch?.   

**Q:**  Suppose you entered a monastery without a ch?. Nobody would ask you, "Where is your ch??", right?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> may not ask, but then each person had his own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a>, either an aristocrat, a monastic estates or the government, and they would ask.   

**Q:**  To whom would the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of the government ask about getting ch??   

**A:**  Probably they might have to ask the relevant dzong.   

**Q:**  When they asked for a ch?, did they [the lords] have to give it?   

**A:**  Yes, they had to. The person asking would have to offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf and 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> or something like that [to the lord].   

**Q:**  Suppose that there were three sons in one family, what rights did they have? Who had the most rights? The elder, the middle one or the younger one?   

**A:**  It depends on the capability of the brothers.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any custom or rule about this?   

**A:**  Yes, they had equal rights.   

**Q:**  What would happen if they didn't get along well?   

**A:**  Even if they had to divide their shares, they had to divide them equally, whether it was 3 or 4 or whatever it may be, there was no such thing as one being bigger and one smaller. That was not there at all. It was equal.   

**Q:**  What would happen to the land? Suppose it was a farmer? Who had to pay and work the taxes?   

**A:**  Whoever got the land, he accordingly had to pay the tax [on it]. This was called sase jendrel [Tib. ས་བཟས་རྗེས་འབྲེལ] which means, "Whoever owns the ground has to pay the tax accordingly."   

**Q:**  Suppose the price of a commodity went up and down, what effect did that fluctuation have on the government? Did it affect the government at all, and how?   

**A:**  I don't know what happened to the government. I don't know how it happened and what effect it had.   

**Q:**  Then what happened with the monasteries? Did that effect the monasteries, and if so, how?   

**A:**  It had a big effect on the monasteries because it affected all the expenditures they had to incur for doing their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> ritual ceremonies, which had to be given according to the rules they were written down in books. The capital [that one got for this donggo] also had to be collected according to the books. They had a problem of these two meet together [expenditures and income being the same]. When you collected the capital, it was the same old capital one always got for this, but when you did the donggo, serving tea, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>, etc. in the monastery, or whatever they had to give, e.g. grains, etc., they could not say, "This year it was a little more expensive so we cannot do it as usual and we have to give less, etc." They could not say that. The value of the income was becoming less, so the expenditures had become more. In that way it affected the monasteries.   

**Q:**  Did they do anything to prevent the rise in the price of commodities because they have to pay more which they didn't have? Did they try to stop the rising prices or something like that?   

**A:**  As far as the people were concerned, they did not worry about the land and getting things out of it, so it didn't bother them.   

**Q:**  I mean the big monasteries and the big Labrang?   

**A:**  They should have, but I have never heard any incident, for example, appealing to the government to control the price or anything. I never heard that. Actually, it concerned the welfare of the people, so the government and the Labrang should have been involved, or rather should have taken interest. But then when it happened it affected the individual, so they didn't really seem to care. They could sort of manage somehow because Tibet has a lot of land and a small population. That's the way it went. Here in India, if there was not enough of something then we could borrow something from America and things like that. But this sort of thing didn't ever happen in Tibet. They had to manage it themselves.   

**Q:**  What would happen when a father and his son didn't get along well?   

**A:**  It was also same.   

**Q:**  The son had to leave and the father didn't leave, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But it depended on the nature of the family. Suppose that one family had a few sons and then the mother died and the father got remarried and got a new wife. If that stepmother was not very good and could not get along well with the sons, then the father had to go instead of the sons. The reason was that the father could not hold the family together. He had failed in his responsibility, so he had to go. Otherwise, in a normal system, the father will remain. Then the son had to go as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> to a different families rather than having his wife come in to his family. You know, one goes out as the bridegroom and one takes a bride in. All this sort of thing happened. When it went well, it was done in the better way. Some would go to the monastery. Whatever you did, whether you became a monk, or went as a magpa or a bride, whatever you did, if you did it in a good way it was good and no one would argue about that. It all depended upon what the parents would give you. In the Indian language it is: "Your [own] sweet will." Whatever they liked to give, you took it and went. The person who was leaving [the family] had no right to claim, "I want this and I want that." This is what we called the good system [Tib. བཟང་པོའི་འགྲོ་སྟང] meaning he has been sent out without a problem. In the sort of system we had in Tibet, in one family we had three or four sons and only one wife [fraternal polyandry]. When they didn't get along well and had arguments and had to split up, they had to divide everything equally.   

**Q:**  What about a girl and a boy? Were there any differences in their rights?   

**A:**  No, there were no differences at all. The girls also got an equal share.   

**Q:**  Suppose in one common <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> household, the father, the son and the daughter don't get along well. When they fought to the extent that they have to divide their property and land, could the relatives and friends decide this by themselves or did they have to report it to the manorial estate [to which they belonged]?   

**A:**  Yes, yes, yes.   

**Q:**  What I mean is, could they decide by themselves without having their nearest and dearest, their relations coming together and deciding it? Or did they have to get permission from the estate, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> or from the government or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> anybody? Or could they decide themselves?   

**A:**  They didn't need to make any report. Suppose there was a father, an old father or young, then there was a daughter also with a bridegroom and a son with a bride. When they didn't get along well, they would decide that one of them had to leave and live separately. When they decided to separate, then the question of whether it was allowed or not allowed did not arise and they could do whatever they wanted. In such cases, it was necessary to inform whoever your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> may be and say, "We could not get along well and we got separated." This is just to inform him. When informing him like this, there was no such a thing as him asking, "What did you do? How did you divide it?" They didn't ask at all.   

**Q:**  Would the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> come into your house, look at your property and divide them? Did he do that?   

**A:**  If you cannot get along well and cannot settle it among yourself, then you had to file a law case. Then a problem arose, because not only did you have to defend yourself and argue, but also whatever is finally divided, they will take away [as fee/tax of one tenth] of the things. This was called g?jusur [Tib. བགོས་ཕུད་བཅུ་ཟུར].   

**Q:**  How does that work? What happened to the tax that was owed from that one tenth?   

**A:**  The g?normally involved taking certain material articles. They didn't take the land.   

**Q:**  Suppose the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> took away the pack animals or the horses, what will happen when you had to send the horse corvee tax, etc? How would one send the horse corvée?   

**A:**  The horse corvee was different.   

**Q:**  Suppose one family had to send 10 horses as corvee, and this had to be divided into the four families, how did that work?   

**A:**  As I mentioned to you earlier, suppose it is a nomad family. Then there were different taxes on the animals. In the Central Tibet area, the taxes were based on the land. These taxes were not based on the animals. The government did not give them animals at all [as with the nomads]. Their taxes were totally based on the land. Taxes in the northern nomad area, however, were based on their animals. Therefore, for example, if you had a certain amount of taxes and a certain amount of land, according to the amount of land, you had to pay that much tax and had to do this much work. It had become necessary for them to keep a few horses, cows, oxen, etc., but no animals were handed over to them because the corvee obligations were based on the land that you had, not because the government gave you horses.   

**Q:**  Thank you, this is very clear now. Going back to the old question, in the year of the Iron-Dragon, the Dalai Lama was enthroned. In that year, the Chinese representatives called Wu Zhongxian came via the sea route while his staff came [overland] through Kham. I think it was in the same year that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> trouble started. I recall vaguely that you once mentioned that Khyungram was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet.">Horji</a> at that time, isn't that correct?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet.">Horji</a>, the governor of the area of the 39 tribes in Nagshö?  

**Q:**  How did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> event happen?   

**A:**  At that time one of the shapes in Lhasa was changing and it was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> wanted to become the next shape. He had a sort of chance and hope. One winter, when he was coming from Nagsh? Lhasa, he passed through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང་བླ་བྲང] The labrang of the lama heading the Drigung sect of Tibetan Buddhism.">Drigung Labrang</a> and Khyungram had close relations, a priest and a patron relationship. Not only that, when Drigung set up the Buddhist dialectics school called the Nyima Jangra Shetra [Tib. nyi ma jcang ra bshad grwa], Khyungram was the sponsor. A shetra is a school where dialectics are taught through detailed explanations as well as debate. That was set up newly in Drigung. At that time, Khyungram was the main benefactor. So Drigung Labrang paid special attention and gave Khyungram a very good reception when he came through that year. He stayed in Drigung for a short period and then left for Lhasa. After reaching Lhasa, his hope of becoming a shape probably could not be achieved. It was also said that Khyungram had a good relationship with Reting and he had very good faith in Reting, but since Khyungram did not get the shape position, some trouble [between himself and Reting] developed. Moreover, I heard that Khyungram was promoted very rapidly during the Reting period. This sort of thing I have heard. Finally, he couldn't get the shape position. I think Phünkang got the shape's post.   

**Q:**  What was the real reason behind this? Why couldn't he get it? Why did Phünkang get it? What happened?   

**A:**  I don't know what the real reason was.   

**Q:**  Was it because of the amount of the bribe?   

**A:**  Probably, I am not sure.   

**Q:**  I heard that Surkhang offered a basket full of gold to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> [to get the shape position]. In general, what kind of man was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>? Was he kind of an honest person? Was he regarded as knowledgeable?   

**A:**  I really don't know much about him, but I heard that earlier he went to the Kham area and at one time he got demoted.   

**A:**  Yes. He was demoted after returning from Kham, but I don't know about that in detail.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  As far as the Regent, Reting Rimpoche, was concerned, I heard that he had been taking a great deal of responsibility ever since the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. Then he found a very good reincarnation of the 13th Dalai Lama who was enthroned. These were the great deeds Reting had done. So it was necessary to give something to Reting Rimpoche as a token of gratitude. This sort of talk developed in the Tsondu. In the tsogdu some people said, "Reting Rimpoche should be given some well-established <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> or estates as a token of our gratitude." At that meeting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> is supposed to have said, "Even after swallowing a mountain, one's stomach was not full, and even after drinking the ocean, one's thirst was not satisfied." [Tib. རི་བོ་བཟས་ནས་མ་འགྲངས, rgya mthso btungs nas ma ngoms]. This sort of thing Khyungram was supposed to have said. That was what made Reting angry. That is what I heard. [However] The subsequent downfall of Khyungram was not due to this, although it might have been influenced it. But the direct cause was not this. Rather it concerned the time that Khyungram had been the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet.">Horji</a> in charge of the area of the 39 nomad tribes of Nagshö. From these tribes, nine tribes (Tib. ཧོརྩོགུ [ཧོར་ཚོ་དགུ]) submitted a petition against Khyungram.   

**Q:**  These nine tribes were within the 39 tribes under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet.">Horji</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they were part of the 39 tribes. One of them, Biru [Tib. འབྲི་རུ ] Dzong, had 9 tribes. These 9 submitted a petition against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>. These 9 tribes which were from Nagshö which was under Biru Dzong. They submitted a petition saying, "During the tenure of Khyungram as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet.">Horji</a>, there was a lot of mismanagement and malfeasance." Then the government set up an Investigation Commission, probably called the Deshib Office [Tib. སྡེ་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས]. I am not very sure.   

**Q:**  Was the Deshib Office established at that time?   

**A:**  I think so. There are two offices. One was called Gyöship [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ] and the other Deshib, but I don't remember exactly which one it was.   

**Q:**  The Gyöshib was set up later after this Dalai Lama took the power and it might have been a branch of the Reform Office [Tib. Legjö Legung]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Yuthok was the head because he was supposed to be fair.   

**A:**  I never heard about that. Anyway, one of those offices had been made responsible for investigating the allegations against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>. Khyungram was called to that office several times, but he refused to go. Whether he refused to go or just didn't go, anyway, he didn't appear at all. Finally, he appealed to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Taktse [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་སྟག་འཚེར], that is, the present Dalai Lama's family, saying, "I have done nothing wrong to get Reting upset. Whatever I have done was with love for the government and the country. Reting got angry because I made the righteous statement [about eating the mountain]. Probably, Reting thought I was incited by somebody and I was called to Investigation Committee. Please support me so that I do not have to go to the committee." Yabshi turned down his request saying, "We can't do that. Whatever might have happened, you have to handle it yourself. You have to settle it. We cannot do anything". So he was turned down by the Yabshi. That is what I have heard. Finally, that office had no alternative but to arrest him since he wouldn't show up when they invited him to explain. They had no way to handle it except to arrest him and bring him there.   

**Q:**  If he had appeared personally when they called, do you think that they would not have confiscated his property and would not have arrested him?   

**A:**  That seems impossible. Unless later on some criminal acts were revealed, then they might have issued some kind of verdict. Otherwise, before looking into it, they could not have arrested him or confiscated his property. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> might have thought the committee would not have investigated what was good or bad but was just prejudiced against him.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it the previous <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Chungtsang Kyamgön Chögi Jungney [Tib. ཆུང་ཚང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་གནས] who was related to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>?   

**A:**  They were not related, but they had a priest-patron relationship, so they were very close.   

**Q:**  The Chungtsang Chögi Jungney was not well and stayed in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was quite sick, so he could not go to Lhasa on horseback. He had to go by river on a coracle. When he came to Lhasa he stayed with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>. When the government officers came to seal the house of Khyungram, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Chungtsang Rimpoche was ill in one of Khyungram's rooms and since it was all of a sudden, they could not do anything except to carry Chungtsang on their back to Nyarong Trülku [Tib. ཉག་རོང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ], who was staying in a nearby house. He was the person who started teaching the scripture called the Thirteen Great Commentaries (Tib. ཤུངཆེན་ཇོགསུམ [གཞུང་ཆེན་བཅུ་གསུམ]) at Nyima Jangra. He was staying there and we were just able to remove him on the back of a man and we were just able to take his clothing [from the house]. That is all. They confiscated all of his other things. It was all of a sudden, so we were just able to remove Drigung Kyamgön and his bedding. We could not take anything else. Similarly, everything in Khyungram's house was sealed and there was no place to go and stay for a while. After quite some time, the joint officials came from both the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> gaa and the Sh? and they resealed everything, making it a sort of more tight and more detailed confiscation of the property. At that time, my father was in Lhasa, but he was ill and couldn't go so I went to ask the officials to return the things that belonged to Drigung Labrang [that were not Khyungram's].   

**Q:**  Where did you go to ask for those things?   

**A:**  The committee of investigators had gone to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>'s house, so I went there and explained. At that time, they were going through one room after another. They were going through all the documents, whatever there was; they were going through them in great detail. They were picking up everything, then putting it back and making a list, one after another. Finally they came to the room where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön Rimpoche used to stay. Then I presented a scarf to them and said, "Look. The things inside this room belong to Drigung Labrang, so please return them to us." They looked through the boxes which had some monk's dresses as well as ritual objects, etc. They gave us those things. Ultimately there were two guns, one pistol and one rifle, which they said that they could not return. They were making a lot of excuses, saying that lamas don't need guns. Finally we explained to them that they had to come down [to Lhasa] by boat and needed protection, so that was why we had this. In the end they gave them back. Finally, they came to the stables where there was a very nice mule called Apchi Gyamo. They totally refused to return this to us, and in the end they even put a seal on its mane [Tib. ཟེ་དམ].   

**Q:**  How do you put a seal on the mane?   

**A:**  They put some kind of little rope around its neck and put the seal on it. For horses, if they have long manes, they put it on the mane itself. After long persuasion and after many days, we were finally even able to get that mule back.   

**Q:**  What about the treasury room and the storeroom? There must have been a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང་བླ་བྲང] The labrang of the lama heading the Drigung sect of Tibetan Buddhism.">Drigung Labrang</a>'s things there. What about those things?   

**A:**  We didn't have many things in the storerooms, but there were a lot of other people around who said, "We kept this box of ours there, etc." Some of them said they got it back others said they did not get anything back. Anyway, there were a lot of people demanding the goods they had left there. Some got them and some did not.   

**Q:**  Was it a normal in Tibet that when they confiscate property, they confiscated even other people's property left there?   

**A:**  I think it was normal that they would not tell you to remove the ornaments that you were wearing on your body. So if people would know that their property was going to be confiscated, they would put on their ornaments and take out whatever they could. The rest of the things would be confiscated.   

**Q:**  From when the Dalai Lama died until 1950, you lost both of your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön Rimpoches and you had to search for their reincarnations. How did things function during that period in Drigung?   

**A:**  As far as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> was concerned, we had two Kyamgön Rimpoches, both of them belonging to one labrang. Their kitchen was the same, their wealth was the same. Whatever they had, they shared. Except for the fact that they lived in two different rooms, otherwise it was all the same. Of course, the principal base of Drigung is Drigung Thil, which was founded by Kyamgön Jigen Gombo [Tib. འཇིགས་རྟེན་མགོན་པོ]. Then there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Phodrang [Tib. རྩལ་ཕོ་བྲང], Drigung Dzong and Nyima Jangra. Those were the main monasteries of Drigung. In addition there were a lot of other branch monasteries everywhere in E, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, Tö and Kham. They [those in branch monasteries] all had to study in one of these major monasteries just as the Gelugpa do with Sera, Drepung and Ganden. All the Drigungpa monks had to come and study in one of those three monasteries.   

**Q:**  What about the decision making. If a problem arose within the jurisdiction of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>, then who had the authority and who would decide what to do and what not to do?   

**A:**  In the case of murder, for example, then the matter had to go to the Metrogongkar Dzong. The locality was not allowed to settle this. In the case of small matters such as villagers who were fighting, etc., these they decided in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> itself. This is because Drigung had the right of legal jurisdiction over its own subjects (Trimgo Rangzen [Tib. ཁྲིམས་འགོ་རང་བཙན]). This was backed by documents given by the different rulers of Tibet like Reting and the Kashag.   

**Q:**  When the country changed its rulers like at the time of the regency or when the Dalai Lama took over, did you have to show your land tenure documents and get them approved and get your legal jurisdiction right approved or did you just have to inform them what you have? How did that system work?   

**A:**  Unless the question arose or some argument came up so that we had reason to show it, otherwise we didn't have to show it to every ruler that came. We didn't have to get anything from them. Generally, the jurisdiction of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> was very big and the taxes Drigung had to pay were also very, very vast. Even under the jurisdiction of Metrogongkar, we had 180 tax units [Tib. འདོན] of land. Drigung was quite large as far as taxes were concerned.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> labrang have to collect the taxes and give them to Metrogongkar?   

**A:**  No. For taxes such as sending corvee horses and pack animals and sending a man, etc, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> under the monastic estates of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> had to send them to Metrogongkar. Some of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>'s miser had to pay taxes to the Ph? area. The miser in the northern nomad areas had to pay taxes to the Lharigo Dzong.   

**Q:**  Who would come to collect the taxes?   

**A:**  Normally, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> would collect the regular taxes like the dzoshe and meshe and hand them over to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Treasury in the name of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང་བླ་བྲང] The labrang of the lama heading the Drigung sect of Tibetan Buddhism.">Drigung Labrang</a> itself.   

**Q:**  Taking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང་བླ་བྲང] The labrang of the lama heading the Drigung sect of Tibetan Buddhism.">Drigung Labrang</a> as an example, when one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön passes away, regarding the search for the new reincarnation, from the religious point of view did you have to report this to the Dalai Lama or the Regent, etc.? Apart from that, from the political point of view, did you have to report to His Holiness the Dalai Lama or maybe to the Regent, for example, like when a government official died they had to offer the things for the dedication [Tib. བསྔོ་རྟེན]. This later became like a tax.   

**A:**  There was nothing about political matters like that, but of course, when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön passes away then normally whatever kind of customs that they used to do before would be done. And it was also done better than before and at least, not less than before.   

**Q:**  That is different. That is from the religious point of view, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But from the political point of view, you didn't have to do that, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For the reincarnation of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön from the religious point of view, you may ask for the divination to the Dalai Lama or the Regent before you decide. But from the political point of view, was it necessary to have approval from the Dalai Lama or the Regent in order to appoint the reincarnation of Drigung Kyamgön.   

**A:**  Regarding the recognition of the reincarnation of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön, when one Kyamgön passes away, then the Drigung labrang will search for various children and will find the most marvelous ones born with great signs, etc. Either through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> or through the sh?, they will submit a petition for divination by the Dalai Lama or Regent. The final selection will be made by the Dalai Lama or the Regent. The final choice or final selection had to be made by the Dalai Lama. Without his approval, the Drigung labrang could not make a decision.   

**Q:**  Suppose that the Dalai Lama was not present, would you send your petition for the divination to the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  No. We had no connection with the Panchen Lama. We would send it to the Regent. After the final selection, we had to report to the government saying that such and such a child has been recognized as the reincarnation of so and so. We would like to come now to the capital to have his first monk's hair-cutting [Tib. དབུ་སྐྲ་གཙུགས་ཕུད] and his first vows (the Pratimoksha vows or the Barma Rabjung [Tib. བར་མ་རབ་བྱུང] vows). And we requested that he receive all the entitlements that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Kyamgön lineage has enjoyed previously. We had to make an appointment by asking permission to come to Lhasa on such and such a day to pick up the approval. When we got the final approval from the government, a day was fixed for the new Drigung Kyamgön to have an audience with the Dalai Lama or Regent. Then at the same time, the government would issue a travel document [Tib. ལམྱིག] saying, "This Drigung Kyamgön's coming to the capital to get his titles, etc., so the subjects on his route should provide the horse corvee and so on as normal"   

**Q:**  Suppose that there was a period in which both the Kyamgön were not available, then did you have a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> as the head of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> administration? Was the appointment of the chandzö Drigong done by the government or was it done by Drigung labrang itself?   

**A:**  Actually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> already had the title of dz?[same as chandzö] from the government. The government would not specially appoint or approve the chandzö; the appointment was normally done by Drigung Kyamgön according to their wishes. In the case where both Kyamgön were not available, as for the political matters, the chandzö would be in charge, but for religious affairs, the Drigung Lhade Mide [Tib. ལྷ་སྡེ་མི་སྡེ] which means the religious and the lay group together, they would choose a certain people as Tritsab [Tib. ཁྲི་ཚབ] Rimpoche [Acting Kyamgön from among the 30 Drigung's disciples or phulob [Tib. བུ་སློབ]. Whoever was suitable for this with respect to knowledge and point of view, you can appoint him to be Tritsab Rimpoche. That appointment could be made within Drigung itself and it didn't need to obtain the approval of the government at all.   

