# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he describes the issues of Luchey and why it was paid and to whom, as well as issues surrounding the buying up shöndre and the differences between the chatsü and the chöndze. Also discussed are the levels of achievement in the monastery and the necessary steps in achieving each monastic position. He describes the responsibilities of the gegö and details of the salary and alms received by monks, and the regulations surrounding this pay. Finally, there are details of the expulsion of monks and rules surrounding this.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_02/M_0002_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What is luchey [Tib. བླུ་བྱེད྄]?   

**A:**  This is the money you pay to avoid becoming a gegö. This is sometimes paid by the monks who have good reason for not doing gegö or who can't read or who are very poor.   

**Q:**  Even if you are healthy, could you pay the luche?   

**A:**  If you are healthy, it depends on whether the high ups permit you to do so.   

**Q:**  You have to ask the permission to the abbot, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The authority over this rests with the abbot and if the abbot gives the permission, then you pay the money and you don't need to become the gegö.   

**Q:**  In general the abbot gives the permission, right?   

**A:**  He would give the permission only to the poor lagyüpa and monks who do not know how to read because the gegö had to read the list of requesting prayers. And they would tell them amount of the money that they have to pay.   

**Q:**  There is no fixed amount of money, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They would just offer the money to the tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  As for the pechawa, what are their monks' obligation or taxes, [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབ་ཀྱི་ཁྲལ]? Did they have to do the shöndre?   

**A:**  No. When you buy out, [Tib. བླུ] the shöndre then you will reach a grade called tagrik. And then you didn't need to do the shöndre and you will go up gradually in line. When they reach their, some would learn the pecha and some would not. When the monks are in the 1st three grades in Deyang; khatog grammar, düding and düchen, they are not pechawa and they have to do shöndre. At this time, if you buy out the shöndre, then you can choose whether you want be a pechawa or not. The better ones would become pechawa. After this, if you become a pechawa then you didn't have to do shöndre.   

**Q:**  What is the name of the 4th grade?   

**A:**  The 4th grade is called tagrik.   

**Q:**  Then the geshe and the lagyüpa are separated, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Since they became the pechawa, they were not allowed to miss even one time tsog and chöra. Unless there is a special big reason in which case you can ask gegö for leave. Then you had to start learning, lurik tagrok, namdrel [Tib. རྣམ་འགྲེལ], uma, [Tib. དབུ་མ] pharchin, [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] and dzö [Tib. མཛོད], these are the 6 classes of pechawa. When you reach the dzö, it was time to pass the geshe exam. The 6th class was the hardest period.   

**Q:**  When you become the pechawa, did you have to go to all the chöra or is it up your choice?   

**Q:**  You had to attend all the chöra. At first when you arrive in chöra you do tsenyi debates before they start the prayers. Then they would beat the gong and all the monks come together and do prayer. Then again there is debating. There are three chöra; in the morning, noon and the afternoon.   

**Q:**  Even though you were pechawa, you had to do the shöndre for three years, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but you can buy out the shöndre by giving a tonggo. When you gave the tonggo then you could jump up to the 4th grade takrig.   

**Q:**  Could you buy out the shöndre from the grade khatog grammar?   

**A:**  Yes you could and then you could jump up to takrig even though you were a small child and then you didn't need to do the shöndre. Even if you are not a pechawa, since you bought out the shöndre, you didn't need to do the shöndre. If you couldn't give the tonggo, you had to remain in the düchen. But for the lagyüba, you never got admitted into the takrig grade if you didn't give the tonggo you have to remain there doing the shöndre. So there are old monks like this in the düchen grade. As for the pechawa even you didn't give the tonggo, you can go to the takrig grade after the three years. But anyway, after sometime he would have to give the tonggo. There is also the custom that with some boys who are smart and good in learning pecha that the abbot will pull them out of their lower grade and put them into takrig grade and become pechawa. Then he didn't need to give the tonggo to buy out the shöndre at once but after sometime he would give the tonggo when he reached like namdrel. There were some dobdo who couldn't give the tonggo and also was not smart to learn pecha. They could reach the düchen grade and they would remain there and had to do the shöndre even when they became old.   

**Q:**  Would you please explain about how the abbot would pull up the smart boys to become pechawa.   

**A:**  The gegö would usually check the boys and when he found some smart boys, he would request the abbot to have him among the pechawa and then the abbot would pull him up to the takrig grade.   

**Q:**  What kind of tonggo do they give to buy out the shöndre?   

**A:**  It is regarded as hard. You had to give the rice gruel, [Tib. ཐུག་པ་སྤགས་ཚོས་མ] and 1 traja in which we use 5 khe and 16 nyga for one tea and one khe is equal to 7 jin.   

**Q:**  One traja means 3 teas and 1 thukpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The rice gruel is quite expensive because you have to use more than 20 khe of butter and more than 4 quarters, [Tib. བཞི་གླིང] of a yak meat. This was so hard that later ordinary monks appealed to nyertsang to eliminate the rice gruel.   

**Q:**  When did this happen? Was it before the Sera War?   

**A:**  This probably occurred at the time of the disturbance regarding the abbot etc, [Tib. ཟིང་ཆ]. Then they changed the rule of serving rice gruel by giving 1 sang alms to each monk as the substitute of the rice gruel.   

**Q:**  Was there a fixed amount of rice to be used for gruel?   

**A:**  Yes, we use over 100 big dre of rice and the cook would come to measure it. After it was decided to pay one sang for the substitute of the rice gruel, it was okay.   

**Q:**  Did you have to give alms to buy out the shöndre?   

**A:**  There is no requirement for alms. But most people gave something like 3 sho or 1 tranka.   

**Q:**  After you become a pechawa did you have to do the gegö?   

**A:**  Yes. But you can avoid the gegö by buying up the chatsü, [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ]. For this you don't need to give much tonggo and if you do this, then you don't have to do the gegö and don't have to go to tsog and chöra and can get the alms share from the place near the main gate, gomchor, [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར]. If you give the tonggo for being the chöndze, then you didn't need to go to the tsog and the chöra and you also get the alms share from the gomchor and you also don't need to be the gegö.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the chatsü and chöndze?   

**A:**  There is a little difference.   

**Q:**  How do they get the chatsü?   

**A:**  If you do the chatsü then you are on the path to the Drepung tsogchen shengo. If you become the chöndze, you just have the name and don't have to go to tsog and chöra, you can just stay in shag, but you are not eligible for tsogchen shengo.   

**Q:**  How do they get the chatsü and chöndze? Did they have to give tonggo?   

**A:**  If you want to be the chatsü then first you have to request the abbot to give you the chatsü. If you get the permission, then you give 1 traja and a light rice soup called thashi, [Tib. ཐ་ཤི] and you give 3 sho alms.   

**Q:**  You didn't need to leave an endowment, [Tib. འཇོག]?   

**A:**  No. These were done by the cunning people. There were many monks becoming chöndze and there was a trouble in the tratsang. Later the common monks were on one side and tsondu members were on the other side and had a fight over this. At that time, it was easy to become a chöndze and many people became chöndze. So they [common monks] said that they are going to make it hard to become the chöndze. Later the tonggo was made harder and the chöndze had to give 3 all-day traja where 3 teas and 1 thukpa is served in one day and 1 sang alms. After they made this regulation, only 2 people could become the chöndze.   

**Q:**  Do they need to leave an endowment?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did the common monks say that you have to make the chöndze tonggo harder?   

**A:**  Yes. This was the time when the common monks were also complaining about the gegö.   

**Q:**  This happened on the same time, right?   

**A:**  It happened like one after another and then the tsondu made the document.   

**Q:**  After becoming the gegö, do they have the obligation for becoming a monk, [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབ་ཀྱི་ཁྲལ]?   

**A:**  After the pechawa became gegö, they didn't need to go to the tsog and the chöra and they pass the geshe exam. Some even after they became geshe, they would get appointed to be the chabu and cashier if they are very capable. The highest geshe is lharamba, [Tib. ལྷ་རམ་པ] if you do this then you are on the road for becoming abbot. The second highest geshe was tsogramba [Tib. ཚོགས་རམས་པ] aimed to be the abbot, then there was lingse dorampa [Tib. གླིང་བསྲེ་མདོ་རམས་པ] which was for those who didn't study pecha so well.   

**Q:**  If you don't do the gegö, could you become the abbot?   

**A:**  There was one person in the past who was good in pecha and when he was in the lower grades, he appeared to be able to become pechawa, so he was pulled up into tagrik without being able to buy out the shöndre. After that, he studied pecha and became geshe. He will not become gegö because he didn't buy out the shöndre. Usually, the monks who had bought up the shöndre would become gegö in line. So he was treated specially and made him to buy out the shöndre, [Tib. བླུ་བྱ] because he couldn't give the tonggo.   

**Q:**  I heard that if you don't become the chatsü then you can't be nyertsang? There are 2 chatsü every 3 years added to be the replacements if the nyertsang died?   

**A:**  Yes that's right. That used to be the case in past, but just before the revolt, our old abbot who was like a sidhi, [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ] and didn't meddle into politics. He was bullied by the monks and many monks requested him to give them the chatsü rank and he gave lots of chatsü even to some child monks and he broke the rules. In the past, they would make only 2 chatsü once every years which is meant for the substitute of the nyertsang and those monk's appearance should be imposing, [Tib. རྫིག་པོ] because they were on the line to become shengo. But during this abbot's time he even gave the chatsü rank to young kids.   

**Q:**  Why did the abbot do this? What was his thinking?   

**A:**  He had the power and he got a lot of gifts from this. And no one could say he was not allowed to do this.   

**Q:**  Then what happened to the monks who were to be the substitutes of the nyertsang?   

**A:**  Then the child monks who couldn't become chatsü withdrew from being chatsü and then they picked up the best out of the remaining chatsü and appointed the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  Did you have to be gegö in order to become chabu?   

**A:**  Probably, most chabu have done gegö.   

**Q:**  What about if they were chöndze?   

**A:**  If they were chöndze and chatsü, they could become chabu even they hadn't done the gegö because chöndze and chatsü are all capable. So their name list was submitted to the protective deity, Thamba Shanggo [Tib. དན་འབག་ཞང་གོ] and the deity would put the seal on the name.   

**Q:**  How did you get into the Deyang tsondu?   

**A:**  If you are a pechawa, after doing the gegö you will get into the tsondu. After doing the nyertsang, you will reach among the tsondu member. There are not many people in the tsondu.   

**Q:**  How many tsondu members were there?   

**A:**  There were about 50 members.   

**Q:**  Most of them were ex-gegö because the gegö changes once every 6 months, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The chöndze and chatsü didn't become gegö, but they become nyertsang and chabu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the common monks become gegö after they bought out the shöndre?   

**A:**  Yes. The lagyüba and the pechawa all had to be gegö if they bought out the shöndre.   

**Q:**  If you didn't buy out the shöndre, then you don't need to do the gegö. If you give the chabu tonggo when you were young you don't need to be the gegö you don't need to do shöndre. So how do you get into the tsondu?   

**A:**  They do nyertsang and get into the nyertsang. [Note: It seems the reason why chöndze and chabu skip gegö is that they don't have to wait for it in turn. Rinchen Tharchen didn't get it until he was 37...they can jump into the nyertsang and chabu posts... For chöndze the only way is through chabu.]   

**Q:**  To become nyertsang you had to be the chatsü, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If you are a chöndze, did you get into the tsondu without being chatsü?   

**A:**  When you become little older you will become tratsang chabu and then you get into the tsondu.   

**Q:**  It seems like being a gegö is better because you have be the gegö only for 6 months, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, did the chöndze become gegö?   

**A:**  No. If you become the chabu then you get into the tsondu. And you can't get into the tsondu from the nyertsang. It is only the chatsü who can become the nyertsang. The chatsü comes to the tsondu after they became the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  You become the tsondu members faster if you go through gegö because the gegö's term is only 6 months, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What work does the gegö do? Is there any work in the chöra?   

**A:**  Yes. The gegö has to go to all the chöra. He checks on whether the monks have come or are absent. Those who don't go to tsog chöra have to ask permission from the gegö to be absent.   

**Q:**  In Deyang, who had to go to the chöra? Did all the young monks have to go to the chöra?   

**Q:**  Yes, the monks in the three düdra had to come. The pechawa had to go until they finish geshe and they were not allowed to be absent even for one day. Those who gave tonggo to buy out shöndre and reached takrig grade had to come to the tsog and the chöra, but they have some exemptions, [Tib. དམིགས་བསལ] and we don't force them very much.   

**Q:**  When you were the gegö, could you really tell us who was absent?   

**A:**  Yes. That was because there weren't that many pechawa in the tsog even though there were 400 monks in the name list. So the gegö will know who was in each grade.   

**Q:**  How many monks would come in the chöra usually?   

**A:**  In the 6 higher grades like uma, namdrel and pharchin they were all pechawa. There are about 10-11 in each grade in the 6 higher grades. Altogether there were over 50.   

**Q:**  Can you monks wear boots in the chöra?   

**A:**  Yes you can wear them in chöra, but in the assembly hall [Tib. འདུ་ཁང] where the traja is served, you were not allowed to wear boots.   

**Q:**  Did the gegö have other duties with regard taking exams etc?   

**A:**  Once a year there was a final examination [Tib. རྒྱུག་ཆེན] in summer. At this time, the examiners were the following 4 people: abbots, the umdze, and lama shungnepa, [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་གནས་པ] and the gegö. All of those four would come to chöra when monks take the exam. The lama shungnepa is the highest degree of the geshe which means they all know all the contents of main text. All those who have done gegö didn't have to come for the final exam. Everyone else had to come whether they are pechawa or not. But the chatsü and chöndze don't have to take the exam. We give these exams all day long and it takes 4-5 days.   

**Q:**  What happens to those who don't know anything? Do you scold or punish them?   

**A:**  People who have to take the exam are given a written notice in which they wrote the names of the texts that they have to memorize in this year to recite in the exam that will be given in the next year. And the exams are all verbal reciting and no writing.   

**Q:**  If they didn't pass the exam would they scold, [Tib. གཤེ་གཤེ] them?   

**A:**  If they didn't pass the exam, we will scold them by saying "later do it well" or something but don't really scold them severely.   

**Q:**  Are there many lagyüpa who didn't give the tonggo to avoid shöndre?   

**A:**  There are just a few. The majority had done it. The lagyüba don't study pecha. Some can't even recite the drölma, [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] prayer. But they have to go through the motions of taking the exam.   

**Q:**  Even when the lagyüba are 35 or 40 or more years old did they have to go to the chöra?   

**A:**  Yes. They had to go to the chöra and tsog, but they were treated little bit special and they won't force them much to come.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the book for the tonggo in which it said when there are alms and salary paid?   

**A:**  It was called the "Book of Iron Ox Year" [Tib. ལྕགས་གླང་སྦུག་པའི་དེབ] [It was in 1901.] The gegö had to check this book to see whether all the tonggo and the salary were given or not.   

**Q:**  How did you know whether the alms and salary were paid, did you make a daily running list on what day, the tonggo is given?   

**A:**  No, we don't need this. Each time when there is a alms or salary the nyertsang or chabu etc will give the gegö a list saying on the day after tomorrow, such and such alms from such and such endowment left by so and so sponsors is going to be given or such and such traja by so and so sponsor is going to be served. The gegö would read it in the tsog. These are called list of salary, [Tib. ཕོགས་ཐོ]. We save these and then at the end of 6 months we compare this with the book if something is missing and then we would tell them.   

**Q:**  Who would give the list of the salary?   

**A:**  If the endowment was left with the chabu, the chabu will give the list and if the endowment was left with the nyertsang, the nyertsang would give it to the gegö.   

**Q:**  What about tratsang discipline? What did you experience in your term as gegö?   

**A:**  The gegö had a lot of power since he holds the jayig of the 13th Dalai Lama with 13 points and I would show off this a lot and I would say, "I am the holder of the 13th Dalai Lama's jayig. If you don't behave well I will teach you a lesson" In my time, there were several fights between some young monks and I caught them and I beat them with thin switches, but I didn't beat them severely and I settled the matters.   

**Q:**  Did you first warn people not to do that?   

**A:**  Yes, we did that and at that time it was called assembly speech, tsogtam [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ] or kagyur, [Tib. བཀའ་སྒྱུར]. The gegö would say this showing an angry face like a rocky mountain, [Tib. རྫ་རི]. Actually, I was educating them saying you can't do this and that. And I would also say, "didn't you do this? What are you going to do in the future!"   

**Q:**  Did you say specific names in the tsogtam?   

**A:**  Usually, I would say it in general. But if there is a specific person who did that, I will go right where the monk is seated in the tsog and I will give him the tsogtam and everyone else will watch him.   

**Q:**  Were those young monks dobdo?   

**A:**  They were like ordinary monks.   

**Q:**  Did they carry knives?   

**A:**  No. Poor thing! [Tib. དམྱལ་བ]   

**Q:**  What else happened during your term of the 6 months gegö?   

**A:**  Then there was another fight. This time I made them to make fringes in the place where there were statues like the 8 disciples of the Buddha [Tib. རྒྱན་དྲུག་མཆོག་གཉིས] in the chöra as the punishment. In Deyang, we were not allowed to fine them money which is taken by the gegö for himself.   

**Q:**  What happens if there is a theft? Would the gegö settle it?   

**A:**  I can settle it and give a beat them with switches and expel them from the monk's order. Even if it is small it is against the rules and it is an expellable crime which is against the religion.   

**Q:**  Do you really read the jayig to see what to do? Or you would you just keep it?   

**A:**  Usually we don't need to read it and it was left there wrapped in khata. It is read every 6 months when the new gegö come in. He has to read it in the tsog on the day he takes the authority. And he gives a tsogtam. "The jayig is in my hands from now and I will put it into practice." Then they put a khata on it and hang it in the dükhang. The gegö has 3 alms shares. If there was a money salary we get the same 3 extra shares. If there was a grain salary, then we get a little extra share which is a small bo, [Tib. འབོ] which holds 10 dre . If there is one khe for monk, then we get 1 khe and 10 dre. This was the source of the income of gegö although was very hard to do.   

**Q:**  Do the gegö have the right to get the extra shares called thondabarsum, [Tib. ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ] which they had in Gomang where they get three times extra shares from the line when they give alms?   

**A:**  In Deyang, we didn't have that. We gave alms in tsog while they were seated and didn't give alms in line.   

**Q:**  When they gave the alms to the monks in line and when they reach umdze or the gegö, would they give whatever money they have in the left hand as the extra share?   

**A:**  They don't have to give that, but there maybe some people giving them by flattering or because they know some monks. In Deyang, the abbot gets 15 shares. This is even for grain salary. He gets 15 khe when the other monk's get one khe.   

**Q:**  Who else gets extra share?   

**A:**  Nyertsang gets 3, chabu gets 3, abbot gets 15, umdze gets 3, labrang chandzö gets 3 and probably the chabril and jama and the caretaker, [Tib. ཇ་ཆབ་བཀོན་གསུམ] also get 3 shares.   

**Q:**  Do the nyertsang and chabu also get extra grain salary?   

**A:**  Yes. The nyertsang, chabu and the umdze get the extra share just like the gegö. But chabri, jama don't get extra grain salary.   

**Q:**  Could you expel a monk on your own if he was callous [Tib. རྫབ་ཆེན]?   

**A:**  Yes I had to. There are 4 things for which we expel monks: (1) theft, [Tib. མ་བྱིན་ལེན་པ] (2) killing a person, [Tib. སྲོག་གཅོད་པ] (3) sex with women, [Tib. མི་ཚངས་སྤྱོད] (4) lying, [Tib. རྫུན་སྨྲ་བ]. The last isn't just ordinary lie. It's for big lie. E.g., when some one praise you like saying you are Bodhistawa and Buddha and if you also pretend to be so and say that I became the arhat, [Tib. དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ] and I understand the emptiness, [Tib. སྟོང་ཉིད་རྟོགས], this would become the big lie. Actually, even if some one was going to prostrate to you, you shouldn't accept it.   

**Q:**  When you expel monks, did you have to report the abbot or you could make the decision?   

**A:**  I could decide to expel. I would then inform the abbot that he was expelled and the abbot will erase him from the name list of monks.   

**Q:**  Did you have to discuss with the abbot before that?   

**Q:**  I didn't have to discuss the abbot for the permission. But I didn't have anything like this in my term.   

**Q:**  The gegö had a big power, right? Can the monk who was expelled appeal to the abbot?   

**A:**  No. The abbot couldn't say reverse this. If he tried, it would be a big incident and the abbot would be accused of lying.   

**Q:**  Who was in the tsondu on regular times?   

**A:**  There was no regular base of tsondu in that name. It was the 4 chabu who meet. The nyertsang meet separately for their business. If there was a big issue, the abbot would be approached and he could call a meeting. Then the abbot would tell the gegö and the gegö will inform the monks in the tsog and they will hold the tsondu gyendzom. Otherwise, they would hold only 2 annual tsondu when the gegö handed over their position.   

**Q:**  What was the difference between the monk's vow called rabjung, [Tib. རབ་བྱུང] and getsül?   

**A:**  Rabjung was when you become a monk and go to the abbot to ask permission to make this boy a monk. First you went to the abbot and say that I have this gidru that wants to be a monk. I would like to get the permission to make him a monk. The abbot will say yea, and bring him in 2 or 3 days later. On that day you have to bring the gidru early in the morning and before this you shave the gidru's head except for a small tuft. There the abbot will cut the tuft and say from this time on, you have become rabjung.   

