# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he describes details of a fire in the Deyang and how this was attributed to a deity.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_07/M_0002_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I heard that one day they asked for the divination, [Tib. ལུང་ཞུ] to the oracles of Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] Tenma, [Tib. བསྟན་མ] and Thambag Shango, [Tib. དན་འབག་ཞང་གོ] when they went into trance and the Nechung and Tenma said that you should ask Thambag Shango. And Thambag Shango said, "You will only get this situation, [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ་ད་ག་ལས་ཡོང་གི་མ་རེད] because you didn't listen to what I told you." When Deyang renovated the assembly hall and built a skylight, [Tib. གནམ་ཁྲ] on the roof, when they asked for the divination to Thambag Shango, the deity said, "Do not build this." But they built it, so this caused that situation. Do you remember this?   

**A:**  I can't say too much for sure about this, but Deyang did build the new skylight.   

**Q:**  Then I heard that Deyang had to take lot of loans.   

**A:**  Oh I see. Deyang was very poor.   

**A:**  I heard that it was implied that the rungkhang fire was caused by the harm from Thambag Shango.   

**A:**  I see.   

**Q:**  Is it true what we heard?   

**A:**  The fire was probably caused by the anger, [Tib. འཁུ་ལྡོག] of the deity. Otherwise, it was impossible to set such a strange fire where the brass binding band of tea container, the jabtra, [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ] buckets were also melted. When we renovated, I didn't hear anything about Thambag Shango told them not to build the skylight. Probably the deity Thambag Shango said don't do this because when I look at the way they asked for the divination, for me it makes some sense, [Tib. འདྲ་པོ་བྱུང]. Our tratsang didn't have much luck. We had a lot of disasters and troubles and we had lots of loans. Then the monks were saying, "oh all of this must be because Nechung deity got angry, [Tib. ཁྲོས་བཞག] so we have to propitiate him nicely." So the tratsang invited Nechung to come to the tratsang saying that we are going to apologize to him. We also invited Thambag Shango for doing good offices, [Tib. འགོ་འདྲེན] to Nechung. We didn't invite Tenma and Gadong, [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] deity.   

**Q:**  Was Triu Kangyur Rinpoche [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་བཀའ་འགྱུར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] also invited to do the good offices?   

**A:**  I'm not sure. Probably he came. He and Nechung were very close. Nechung sat in the middle of the hall and Thambag Shango was seated on one side and they two were provoked to go into trance, [Tib. སྤྱན་འདྲེན] face to face. I was in the assembly hall, dukhang, [Tib. 'du kgang] on that day. Nechung came into trance well but Thambag Shango didn't come into trance. The dukhang was filled with monks and they were watching the two oracles. Then Nechung himself was in a kind of desperate situation and told the monks who were sitting in between to move away so that he can see Thambag Shango. And then Nechung got up and went in front of Thambag Shango who have not yet came into trance. And then he threw some blessed barley, [Tib. ཕྱག་ནས] onto Thambag Shango's face. Then Thambag Shango came into trance. Then Nechung gave Thambag Shango a khata and put in on his neck. Then Nechung grabbed Thambag Shango from the khata around his neck and pulled him to the inner chapel where there was the clay statue of Sogpo Changchub Panden, [Tib. སོག་པོ་བྱང་འཆུབ་དཔལ་ལྡན] the founder of Deyang. There probably Nechung asked Thambag Shango what did you promise, [Tib. ཁས་བླངས་དམ་བཅའ] in the past ect. In short, Nechung did the good offices to Thambag Shango. And the good offices were done in the opposite way. And later, it was said that Thambag Shango's anger was cooled.   

**Q:**  Then Thambag Shango might have accepted the apology, right?   

**A:**  Probably yes.   

**A:**  Another person speaking: Can I see the Dalai Lama?   

**Q:**  We have this hope.   

**A:**  Rinchen Tharchin: Yes you can see him.   

**A:**  Another person speaking: I am afraid that I will die before seeing the Dalai Lama because I am not healthy. I have been holding the empty hope since 1959.   

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  Rinchen Tharchin: He is 72 years old and he is also from Deyang. Actually, Nechung is much higher and how could he come in front of Thambag Shango.   

**Q:**  The monks who play the Gyaling, [Tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] were also done as a monk's obligation, right?   

**A:**  Yes, because they didn't study pecha and remain as a lagyüba, so they would be asked whether they want to play Gyaling or play the trumpet, [Tib. དུང་པ] and they choose whatever they want to and start learning it.   

**Q:**  Were there the monks who were good in chanting prayers called dönsanga, [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་བ] in Deyang?   

**A:**  Yes. We call them Dongdrewa [Tib.གདོང་གྲལ་བ] which means sitting in the front and reciting the prayers. They have their own organization and they had to learn all the prayers like prayers for propitiating the protective deities, kangso, [Tib. བསྐང་གསོ] and they have to take the exams and they were like pechawa exempt from all other obligations. They say we are like pechawa. We don't have to do any work. This was equal to kesang, [Tib. སྐད་བཟང] and dönsang in Gomang.   

**Q:**  Did the gegö go to the tsondu to check the accounts and see whether the chabu, ngünyer and nyertsang paid all the salaries from the interest they got from the endowments?   

**A:**  They didn't have to go and do it at the tsondu because they had their own book. If you didn't pay the salary, they will ask you why.   

**Q:**  Didn't they have to compare it?   

**A:**  No. If you don't pay the salary, they will ask you why.   

**Q:**  Where did the abbot live?   

**A:**  The abbot lived in his labrang located on top of the main gate of the Deyang assembly hall, gomchor, [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར]. In reality, it was the room of the Dalai Lama and usually the abbot was bossy and they let him stay there. Otherwise, there wasn't any separate room for the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Where did the chabu meet?   

**A:**  The chabu's place was on the top of the stone stairs.   

**Q:**  In what season, did the Dalai Lama take his geshe exam, tsentag [Tib. msthan rtags] in Drepung?   

**A:**  It was in late summer though others take the Geshe exam in winter. At that time, I had passed the geshe exam and had already joined the Gyüpa.   

**Q:**  When did they get into the Hamdong, [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] tsondu? Some say that after becoming Khamtsen gegen, they get into the tsondu and some say after they become chandzö, they get into the tsondu?   

**A:**  After you have done the Khamtsen gegen, then you are in the tsondu. This is clear. I am not sure about the chandzö in Hamdong.   

**Q:**  I heard after they have done the Khamtsen gegen, they had to be the chandzö and after they finished chandzö, they become tsondu member and then they had the power to talk. Before that, they got into the tsondu, but had no power to talk. [laughter]   

