# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he discusses the government supplies and structure, specifically of the Laji office. He then compares the Geshe level today with it’s historical roots. Detailing the revolt in 1959, he describes how he hoped that foreigners and the Khambas would intervene and defeat the Chinese. He also describes study sessions in the Phodrang.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_08/M_0002_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Was most of the assembly tea, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>, [Tib. མང་ཇ] given by government or laji?   

**A:**  Mangja was at first started by the government. Later, they left the endowments, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེབས་རྩ] An endowment fund.">thebtsa</a>, [Tib. ཐེབས་རྩ] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> would bring butter for the mangja.   

**Q:**  You mean the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were animals like female yaks which were leased to the nomads for which they had to pay fresh butter. Usually, the butter was supplied by the dewashung. In summer the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> was given by the Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིགས་སྤྱི] The monastic committee that consisted of the six incumbent Drepung abbots. Ex-abbots and the abbot of Ngagpa College were excluded. It was responsible for doing the 18 day Rigdra Ceremony for which it had estates to provide the funding.">Riji</a>, [Tib. རི་སྤྱི] for a period. In winter, some were given by Drepung Jiso. But these were just given in between and were not given many times.   

**Q:**  When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a> gave the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a>, the laji was in charge of it, right?   

**Q:**  No, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུང་ཁང] A monastic kitchen.">rungkhang</a> there was the representative of the government and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> was overseen in terms of making it by 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་མ] The monk(s) in charge of a monastery&#x27;s kitchen.">jama</a> and chatsü deba, [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ་སྡེ་པ]. The government probably collected the butter lease from the nomads and then transferred it to the monastery. Tridor la: I heard that they brought the butter from the Phodrang to the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  Do you think that, nowadays it is possible to have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> like we had in the past? If not, what kind of methods should we take to have that?   

**A:**  It's hard because there are only few monks nowadays. In the past, there was a big assembly and there were better<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a> than now. So if there were more pechawa, the standard of the learning <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> was also better. To have the monks study pecha well, we need good <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> to teach pecha, but now we don't have geshe who have passed the geshe degree because all the old geshe died and now all the teachers are the better ones from among those geshe candidates who have yet to take the exam. In the past, there were many geshe who got the places, [Tib. ཨང་ཀི] when they passed the exam and we could select the teachers as we wished.   

**Q:**  Could it be gradually improved in the future like in 5-6-10 years?   

**A:**  It will be hard to have very good <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>. One reason why this will be hard is that in the past, the geshe had to take the exam before the Dalai Lama. Another one is that in the past, they used to study diligently only the five volumes of the main texts, [Tib.གཞུང་བཀའ་པོད་ལྔ] and we weren't permitted to study poetry, [Tib. སྙན་ངག] history and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སུམ་རྟགས] Tibetan grammar.">sumtag</a> [Tib. སུམ་རྟགས] grammar. If somebody studied those things they would be scolded saying that this will make you get amused in these things. But, now if you can say something about the history, you don't need much practice [in the dharma].   

**Q:**  What happened in the monastery when the revolt took place in 1959? At that time, you were in the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We had heard several days before that the revolt will arise. We heard from messages that the Khambas were in Norbulinkga and they were doing this and that etc. We were in the monastery at this time. We couldn't go to the war, so we stayed in the monastery and just said to each other what shall we do. Then on the 11th-12nd [Tibetan date] morning before dawn they started firing the cannons. We could see from the monastery the shells flying from Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག] to the regiment in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> in the dark of the night. We had never heard this noise before so we got frightened and most of the monks fled from the monastery. Then we got a message in the hills (behind monastery) saying to return, that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> will be continued as before, so one group of monks returned to the monastery. The leaders like the lamas, monastic officials <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་སྣེ] The general name for all monastic officials.">lene</a>, [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] and abbots understood the situation, so they fled and they didn't come back [in another interview said that the tratsang all put their seal on the message telling the monks to return]. We were already on the other side of the hill behind Drepung. So we returned.   

**Q:**  You fled on the 11th night, right?   

**A:**  Not at night, but in the evening of the 11th, we fled when we saw all people were fleeing, but actually, there was no place to flee. After we returned, then one day they said all those with rank or position, [Tib. མིང] should stand up. It is okay even if you have a little position. They said that as if they are going to give us something, but instead they imprisoned us. Even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་མ] The monk(s) in charge of a monastery&#x27;s kitchen.">jama</a> were imprisoned in Phodrang. They didn't keep everyone there in Phodrang for long and they differentiated and higher ones were moved to Loseling.   

**Q:**  Where were you held?   

**A:**  I was held in Phodrang. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] One of the colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Deyang</a> was considered not involved in the revolt since our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> was humble and we couldn't hold any meetings and act show-offish in the revolt. And we told them that we didn't do anything in the revolt.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> they fired the cannons on the 11th and the war took place in the Lhasa city on the 12nd and the 13th and took over the Tsulagang and Ramoche. They [PLA] didn't enter the monastery right away and after many days, they entered the monastery. Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes. The soldiers didn't arrive at once in the monastery, but it was not after many days. In between that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> continued for 1-2 more days, but it was not a normal tsog. There was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> because the monks have to drink tea.   

**Q:**  What did you think at this time? Did you think that religion would remain as before and you would have the religious freedom?   

**A:**  I supposed, [Tib. ཆ་བཞག་པ] that there will be no religious freedom though the Chinese were going through the motions of saying pleasant sounding things that there will be religious freedom, but in our mind, we had high hopes on the foreign countries. I also had hopes on the Khampas, so if these two combined and could over throw our master, [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] [the Chinese], then there will be some hope that we would become okay, otherwise there was no hope at all, [Tib.སེམས་ཐག་རེད]. We all were definite and sure, [Tib. ཐག་བཅད་རྐྱང་བྱས] about that.   

**Q:**  Some monks said that we thought that maybe the Tibetan government and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> system would be eliminated, but the monastery would remain as before?   

**A:**  Yes, there might be some thinking in that way, but most thought that there might not be, [Tib. ཡོད་ཀྱི་མ་རེད] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> and those things in the monastery. Then we had lots of meetings in the Phodrang when we were under arrest and they talked a lot about expelling monks.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Phodrang?   

**A:**  I stayed one year. Then they differentiated the monks and they went through the motions of releasing me on 10/1/59, the Chinese National day. From then they held the study session for expelling of monks. They encouraged monks to return to their village to live with family. And they said it's good to go to operates machines, probably they meant driving vehicles or work in the stores, etc. So at this time, most monks left on their own will and went to get the certificate.   

**Q:**  What did you do after you were released?   

**A:**  When I was released from Phodrang, I was put among the ordinary monks and they said I had to go to build the Power Station in Ngachen trhang [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན་འཕྲང] so I went to Ngachen and worked there. Oh it was so difficult for me [he had never worked]. After that, they gave us 3 days off on the Spring Festival, [Tib. དཔྱིད་ཀའི་ལོ་གསར]. I then told the monastery officials that I can't do this, so please give me permission to leave the monastery and go home [in the Barkor]. I was afraid that they would next send me far away to another place. I had heard that the communists when they took power would separate parents and children and husband and wife, so I thought it is better to go home then. The leader at this time was a Tibetan cadre who was pretty nice and he gave me the permission to return. He said okay and wrote me the pass and I took my bedding and returned home. Then I was really happy.   

**Q:**  Some people told me that they held the Mönlam Festival in 1960-61. How many times did they hold the Mönlam after 1959?   

**A:**  In 1960 when I was in Lhasa, they held the Mönlam and it was said that all the monks in Lhasa have to go to the Mönlam and I also wore my monk's robe and went through the motions of attending the Mönlam. Then in 1961, maybe they held the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  How many times did you attend the Mönlam?   

**A:**  I went only once, but there were several times.   

**Q:**  Some say twice and some say three times.   

**A:**  Probably, they held three times? There was one when the Panchen Lama came. He went through the motions of giving the places for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> exam etc.   

**Q:**  This was in 1962. There was no Mönlam in 1964, 1965 right?   

**A:**  Probably not. But it was not because of the disturbance took place. After that, when they were talking about the separatists shouting slogans and so on, then they didn't hold the Mönlam. I am sure there weren't more than 3 Mönlam.   

**Q:**  This was before the Cultural Revolution, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

