# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he describes the differences between the Deyang and Gomang classes and the functions of each class. He discusses the issues of monks not being able to perform geshe and describes the tsoramba and the trouble with the Deyang. The interviewee describes the chöndze and the chatsül and giving the drerampa tonggo. Included in the interview are descriptions of the factions in favor of common monks and the new gegö rule made prior to the Chinese invasion. The interviewee also gives his personal account of his loans and livelihood, including the receipt of alms, and finally, a detailed description of the three chöra and how these were done.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_06/M_0002_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:** [Note: For the first section the subject repeated the dates the chöra were held so it was not translated again] [TN Note: As noted above, the first section where the subject tells different dates of the chöra was regarded as a repeat and was not translated, but I found there are many new important questions and answers given in more details in this long section. So I translated the full section]   

**Q:**  I know about the main four monthly chöra or chöthog, but what are the 20 days chöra, [Tib. ཉི་ཤུ་ཆོས་ར]?   

**A:**  In between the Mönlam, [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] and the Tsongchö, [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད], there was one called Barchö Chöra, [Tib. བར་ཆོས་ཆོས་ར]. This was called the 15 days chöra, [Tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་ཆོས་ར] because it only has 15 days.   

**Q:**  What month and dates did they hold this chöra?   

**A:**  This chöra started from the 3rd of the 2nd lunar month until around 17th of 2nd lunar month. And on the 18th, the monks had to go to for the Tsongchö.   

**Q:**  Did the Tsongchö start on the 18th of the 2nd lunar month?   

**A:**  Yes, it started on the 18th and ended on the 30th. This was held in Lhasa not in Drepung. After the great spring chöra, [Tib. དཔྱིད་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] then the month commemorating the Buddha's birth, enlightenment and Para Nirvana, Sagadawa, [Tib. sa ga lza ba] started on the 1st of the 4th lunar month and ended on the 15th, but there was no chöra because during that there was no tsog.   

**Q:**  This was the break, chöntsham, [Tib. ཆོས་མཚམས] right?   

**A:**  Yes. From the 17th or 18th, there was a chöra called the exam chöra, [Tib. རྒྱུགས་སྤྲོད] which was also 15 days. From the 15th-16th of the fifth lunar month, till the 15th- 16th of the 6th lunar month, the great summer retreat, yarchö chenmo [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] starts which was held for one and half months and there was no chöra during this time which was called the great chöntsam. On the 30th of the 7th month, the Jongyu, [Tib. ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ] where the monks who went far distances. On the 3rd of the 7th lunar month, Rigtra Chenmo, [Tib. རིགས་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ] would be held which was for giving tonggo. On the 3rd of the 8th lunar month, there was a monthly chöra which was called the great autumn chöra, tönchö chenmo [Tib. སྟོན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ].   

**Q:**  What is the meaning of Rigtra?   

**A:**  This was for giving us tonggo and going to get the salary and the alms. I am not sure about the meaning.   

**Q:**  How many days did the Rigtra take place?   

**A:**  This was also during the great chöntsam and from the 3rd of the 8th lunar month till the beginning if the 9th lunar month there was the bathing picnic, [Tib. ཆབ་ཞུགས] and the great autumn retreat, tönchö chenmo, [Tib. སྟོན་ཆོས་ཆེམ་མོ] would be held.   

**Q:**  How many days did the Rigtra take place?   

**A:**  There were three Rigtra; the big, middle and the small, [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག་འབྲིང་ཁག་ཆུང་ཁག]. Ours was the middle one which was for 12 days.   

**Q:**  Was this for all the Drepung or only for Deyang?   

**A:**  The tonggo was given by Deyang to all of Drepung. It was also done by turns.   

**Q:**  Did each tratsang hold their Rigtra?   

**A:**  Loseling held their Rigtra in the tsogchen for 15 days which was the big one and Gomang was also same. There were 2 middle ones also held in the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  Did the government give the tonggo or was it given by the laji?   

**A:**  The 6 abbots gave this tonggo by turn and they also had a lot of income to collect like from Rama Shiga in Phenpo, [Tib. འཕན་པོ] and they also got butter etc from other sources.   

**Q:**  Did two abbots give this by turn?   

**A:**  No. One abbot would give this tonggo. And the small Rigtra was for 10 days. The middle one was given by Deyang and the Gyepa. The small one was given by Shagor, [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར] and the Düwa, [Tib. འདུལ་བ].   

**Q:**  All the monks of Drepung came to the tsog, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  From where the monks of Gyepa come?   

**A:**  The Gyepa abbot would give the tonggo, but the abbot did not go to the tsog.   

**Q:**  They had to give the tonggo because they got the income from the shiga, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was like a nyerpa or chandzö who collected the income and gave the tonggo by turn.   

**Q:**  I heard from a Geyog, [Tib. དགེ་གཡོག] of Deyang that the abbot of Deyang who was in the same shag died within the 6 years term and the tratsang had to give the tonggo.   

**A:**  Yes, the abbot was called Dzogchen, [Tib. རྫོགས་ཆེན] who died just before his term was over. Then Deyang appointed two geshe as his substitute.   

**Q:**  After Rigtra chenmo, the great autumn retreat was held, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was for one month from 3rd of 8th lunar month to the 3rd of the 9th lunar month. From the 2nd of 9th month, it was also chöntsam and from the 16th and 17th, we would white wash the houses and there was a chöra called Sakar, [Tib. ས་དཀར] chöra for 20 days. From 1st-2nd of the 10th lunar month, there was a chöntsam and then from the 16th-17h of the 10th lunar month, there was the Ngamjö Chöra for one month. From 2nd and the 3rd of the 11th lunar month, there was another chöntsam and there was no tsog. From the 16th-17th of the 11 lunar month, the great winter retreat, günchö chenmo, [Tib. དགུན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] was held.   

**Q:**  Was the great winter retreat and the Jang günchö same?   

**A:**  No. Jang günchö was held down there in Jang.   

**Q:**  Were they held at the same time?   

**A:**  No. Jang günchö was held on 1st-2nd of the 11 lunar month till the 15th of the 12th lunar month and the monks would stay in Ratö, [Tib. ར་སྟོད] and the great winter retreat was held on the 16th-17th of 11th lunar month.   

**Q:**  So the monks couldn't attend both of these, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [TN note: above this is the first section]   

**Q:**  The grades of Deyang and Gomang are different. Is this correct?   

**A:**  Yes. In Gomang, there was no khatog grammar, düming and the düchen.   

**Q:**  In Deyang, the 1st grade was the khatog grammar, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the 2nd was the düming, the 3rd was düchen and then 4th was takrig, 5th was lurig, 6th was Namdrel, [Tib. རྣམ་འགྲེལ], 7th was Pharchin, [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན], and then uma, [Tib. དབུ་མ] and then dzö, [Tib. མཛོད] and then düwa, [Tib. འདུལ་བ]. And there was also a grade of old monks that have passed the chöra and they were called the 1st grade called dzin, [Tib. འཛིན], 2nd grade, 3rd grade and the 4th grade. These are the grades of the ex-monastic officials, thönsin, [Tib. ཐོན་ཟིན].   

**Q:**  Was it like the karampa,[Tib. བཀའ་རམ་པ] 1st grade and the 2nd grade?   

**A:**  No. In Gomang, karampa were the ones who study the tsenyi. The above mentioned 1st and 2nd grade had passed all the tsenyi grades and the shöndre in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  The Gomang had the khatog grammar, khatog gong and düdring and düchen, right?   

**A:**  These four were the düdra.   

**Q:**  Did they study the düdra before the tsenyi?   

**A:**  Yes. This was the base for practicing the intelligence [Tib. རིག་པ] for studying tsenyi and they had takrig, lurig, Pharchin and the döndönchö, [Tib. འདོན་འདོན་ཆོས] which was also a part of Pharchin.   

**Q:**  They also had the shungwog, [Tib. གཞུང་འོག] and shungong, [Tib. གཞུང་གོང]. Since it was different between the tratsang, if they asked you a question from shungong, how would you answer it if you hadn't studied them?   

**A:**  We study and gave answers according to the texts of the 5th Dalai Lama and only the way of debating was not same but the actual meaning was the same. They also would debate according to the words of the Jayang Shepa, [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ]. There were some texts like Namdrel, [Tib. རྣམ་འགྲེལ] that should be learned by all the great monastic seats.   

**Q:**  In Deyang, from what grade did they pass the geshe?   

**A:**  They passed the geshe from Pharchin, Uma and Dzö and then they studied the Düwa and then they gave the name of the geshe and drew the lots and then passed the geshe exam.   

**Q:**  Was the number of years for studying tsenyi in Deyang and Gomang the same or not?   

**A:**  It was almost the same except 1-2 years difference.   

**Q:**  Who went faster? Was it Gomang or Deyang?   

**A:**  Sometimes Deyang went faster, sometimes Gomang was faster. There were more candidates in Gomang for geshe Lharamba because there were more monks studying pecha in Gomang. Deyang had less geshe.   

**Q:**  What were the functions of the grades: 1st, 2nd, etc.?   

**A:**  These are the ones who have finished their geshe. They just put their names there and they can go for circumambulating as they wish or stay in their shag do some prayers. There was no other work to do and it was up to their whether they go to the tsog or not.   

**Q:**  What happens to those monks who have the enthusiasm to become geshe but weren't intelligent enough to do it? If they couldn't debate well, would they get expelled?   

**A:**  No. They wouldn't get expelled. Everyone had to look at his own capabilities and if he thinks he can do geshe, he will do it, if he thinks he can't, then he will resign from pechawa on his own. He would go to the abbot and say I can't become pechawa because I don't understand, so I would like to resign. There was no throwing out, but there was a lot of examining and looking at the candidates to see who was really qualified for Lharamba, or Tsogrampa, [Tib. ཙོགས་རམས་པ] etc. Internally, the abbot and the monks will know who was better and who was worse, but the abbot would go through the motions of examining them and then the abbot used his final authority and say who was Lharamba, or Tsogrampa.   

**Q:**  What happened if someone thinks they are okay, but if others think that he is really terrible, [Tib. སེམས་ཐག་རེད]? Even if he took the exams, and he failed. Could he get the geshe like the tsogrampa?   

**A:**  Unless, the monk's condition was at least so-so, they won't put him in tshogrampa geshe. The people would think that he will be unable to become tsogrampa geshe. The reason for this was that the tshogrampa had to take test in front of the Dalai Lama. If he wasn't qualified to be the geshe, the Dalai Lama would say he isn't adequate for tsogrampa and would tell them to send a substitute and have this monk study for a few more years.   

**Q:**  Did the tsogrampa take their exam in the tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes. Lharamba and tshogrampa took their first test among the common monks because there were many who had to take the geshe exam in the same grade. They would debate tsenyi day after day and make them give the answers. Then the abbot would examine them and say that you are good in pecha, so you can be Lharampa and say you are not that good in pecha, you have to be the tshogrampa. Then they would be sent to the Dalai Lama for the exam.   

**Q:**  In Mönlam, they gave the geshe the number of places, [Tib. ཨང་ཀི] right? What geshe was passed in the Mönlam?   

**Q:**  All the Lharampa from the three great monastic seats would go there. In one year 16 Lharampa would take the exam in the Mönlam in one year. In the 5th lunar month, an order comes from the Dalai Lama telling the geshe lharampa to come to Norbulinga for the examination. At the time of the examination, one geshe sits and the other 15 debate with him in turn and they would corner him severely. On one side the Tsenshab would be seated and on the other side the other geshe would sit. In the middle, the geshe who answers the questions, [Tib. དམ་བཅའ་འཇོག་མཁན] would sit. The Yongdzin are also there. Behind a curtain (its indoors) the Dalai lama sits, we can't see him, but we can sometimes hear the sound of pages turning from behind the curtain. Maybe, he was reading his pecha to find out the solutions when there were some contradictions in the debate. After this examination, the places of the Lharampa would be set up. The better ones got the places, but the Lharampa who were barely qualified do not get the places.   

**Q:**  They would also have to take the exam on the Mönlam, right? Did they conform the 1st and 2nd place in Mönlam or in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  The final exam was given in the Mönlam but most probably the places were roughly confirmed in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  In Norbulinga, there were two tutors to the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The 2 Drepung abbots would come at this time when they were debating.   

**Q:**  Did they debate in the dharma grove, [Tib. གསུང་ཆོས་ར་བ]?   

**A:**  They debated in the courtyard called khyamra [Tib. ཁྱམ་ར] they did the debating all day and night till about 10-11 p.m. The two Drepung abbots would have to examine very much and they have a great responsibility and make a list of their ranking of who was the first, second and the third places and give it to the Tsenshab. The Tsenshab would submit it to the Dalai Lama. He will compare this list with that he had from the examination at Norbulinga and discuss with the Tsenshab's opinions and confirm the places on the day of the Mönlam exorcism, [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག].   

**Q:**  When a new monk joined the monastery and had his tuff of the hair cut in front of the abbot, was this called rabchung, [Tib. རབ་བྱུང]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  When you became rabchung, then you become a member of the kyidu.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At this time you didn't have the vow, right?   

**A:**  Yes. You had not yet taken the eight kinds of vows. You only had got the vow in between called barma rabchung [Tib. བར་མ་རབ་ཆུང] vow where you can remain there and or go further up.   

**Q:**  How many years could you stay with the barma rabchung vows? Could you remain there like 10-15 years and then become the getsül?   

**A:**  No, this was not allowed. In Deyang, we became monks at age 5-6 or 7. In other tratsang, they become monks at the age 10-11 or so. When we become monks at the age 7-8, we got the barma rabjung vows, then before you were 20 years of age, you had to take your getsül vows. Then after you reach 20 years of age you took your gelong vows. In order to stay in the monastery, you must take the gelong vows after you are 20. You are not allowed to stay there without taking the gelong vows. This was not just Deyang custom this was the custom of all the monasteries.   

**Q:**  Could you remain in the monastery as long as you wish after taking the barma rabchung and before taking the getsül vow?   

**A:**  There was not much problem even if you stay there, but it was good for you to not to stay too long because you could avoid committing negativities. If you become a monk at the age 7 you can remain there till the age 15 before taking the getsül vows. Most monks take getsül vows soon after become a monk, but a few in Deyang wait till they are about 15.   

**Q:**  Was this a custom of Deyang?   

**A:**  No, this was in general.   

**Q:**  I heard that the dobdo don't have the gelong vows?   

**A:**  Dobdo were doing all sorts of rubbish things, [Tib. ཆག་རྡུང་ཉག་རྡུང]. You shouldn't look at them. [laughter].   

**Q:**  Now my next question is how did the gelong and the getsül become the monastic officials, lene [Tib. ལས་སྣེ]? The getsül was allowed to become gegö. There were no getsül who was above the age 20, right?   

**A:**  Yes. All of them had to take the gelong vow.   

**Q:**  We need to ask again about the Deyang's trouble because it is still not clear. Some say that the trouble started when the new and the old gegö had an argument when they were handing over the position and the new gegö and the abbot physically fought. Then they were beaten with switches by the tsondu and the common monks couldn't do anything though they were standing on the gegö side.   

**A:**  What you said now is wrong. The trouble didn't start when the old and new gegö were confronting each other. They both were on the side of the common monks. The old one was older and humble in personality and younger one was a person who says "I will get it done" [Tib. ངས་བཏང་གོ] The trouble took place when the old gegö was handing over the position to the new gegö and the tsondu met on that day. It only meets for 2 days in a year; one in summer and one in winter when the gegö change hands. On the day of the meeting, the common monks rushed up to the tsondu. The two gegö and the common monks had solidarity. The new gegö came to the tsondu only on that day. The old and the new gegö stood up strongly behind the common monks and the new one acted very strongly. The abbot was angry with this and he himself stood up and there were about 7-8 tsondu members with him. This all took place in one day. There were probably 7-8 tsondu members in the meeting that day. That day the abbot got very angry and he rose and came towards the place where the main tsondu members were sitting. This issue had been raised several times before the meeting and the tramang had asked the abbot about this. On the day of the meeting, the common monks also met in the chöra and they tried to come upstairs to the tsondu's meeting place.   

**Q:**  Did this happen in one day?   

**A:**  Yes. There was the talk before that, the monks also reported the abbot. On the day of handing over, they beat the monks with switches.   

**Q:**  If you were chöndze, you couldn't get into the tsondu unless you became a chabu, right?   

**A:**  You don't get into the tsondu by only being a chöndze; however, if you got appointed the chabu, then you got in the tshondu. You didn't need to become a gegö.   

**Q:**  Did the chöndze and chatsül have to give the tonggo of drerampa's [Tib. གྲལ་རིམ་པའ] tonggo?   

**A:**  The chöndze and chatsü had to give the tonggo of drerampa. This was really like a tax that they didn't have any choice but to give.   

**Q:**  Tell me again about what kind of tonggo the chöndze, chatsü and drerampa would give?   

**Q:**  The drerampa's tonggo was the tonggo to buy out the shöndre. In the past, they had to serve a rice gruel, [Tib. ཐུག་པ་སྤགས་ཚོས་མ] and a traja in the tratsang. At this time, in the past, there were many people giving chöndze tonggo because they could avoid gegö. Later, they said the drerampa tonggo should be reduced and they abolished the rule of serving rice gruel and had to pay 1 sang alms as the substitute of the rice gruel and serve one traja.   

**Q:**  Did you make this rule when you were in the monastery?   

**A:**  This was made before gegö's trouble. That's why the trouble arose saying that the chöndze and chatsü didn't need to be gegö by giving a easy tonggo.   

**Q:**  What kind of tonggo would the chöndze give? In the past when doing chöndze, you had to give alms of 3 sho and a rice porridge that was loose and a traja. Then the gegö read a letter saying you were a chöndze.   

**Q:**  You didn't need to leave the endowment, [Tib. འཇོག] right?   

**A:**  Yes. Later, they made the chöndze very hard. And in the past, the chatsü was also the same. You had to give alms of 3 sho, and a rice porridge that was loose, and a traja. It was easy. Both were easy to get. Later, the chöndze had to give an all day long, nyinkhyong, [Tib. ntin 'khyongs] traja with a rice porridge and alms of 1 sang. And then the chatsü was changed to serve: 1 traja (3 teas), 1 rice porridge, alms of 3 sho and 100 dotse endowment to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  When did these begin?   

**A:**  They were before the gegö trouble.   

**Q:**  Who settled these, the abbot or tsondu?   

**A:**  The abbot decided who could do chöndze and chatsü. If they gave him a gift, he kept half and gave the other half to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Who made the new change?   

**A:**  This was made by the common monks themselves.   

**Q:**  Who gave the approval or permission, [Tib. ཆོག་མཆན]?   

**A:**  The common monks asked the abbot, but got no formal approval by the abbot or tsondu. But the common monks just announced it though no one gave the order. They did it in a easy way.   

**Q:**  This was during the Taktra, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the abbot approve these just in name, [Tib. མིང་ཙམ]?   

**A:**  No, he didn't say anything, It was the common monks themselves who used their strength. At this time, the late new gegö who was in the same grade with me was also kind of leading the common monks and they went through the motions of suing a law case and discussed this with the kudrak.   

**Q:**  It wasn't the order from the yigtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably, the kudrak talked in between. The matter regarding the chöndze, chatsü and drerampa happened almost at the same time.   

**Q:**  Didn't the tsondu oppose what the common monks said?   

**A:**  No. Later the common monks became very powerful at this time. And later it came to be that whatever the issue; the trsondu had to say that they have to ask the common monks about this.   

**Q:**  Who was the leader of common monk?   

**A:**  My late gegen and the main one was an old geshe called Jayang [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས] who was a great one. He had done gegö. Later, he was told not to be allowed to sit at the head of 3 people. Before that, the nyertsang was managed by the individual, later the common monks said that the nyertsang should be managed by the chabu or tratsang, [Tib. སྦུག་འཛིན] and this issue ended up with making the appeal to the government. There was one faction on the side of common monks and another one on Thamba Simkhang, [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང] and tratsang side. The common monks won this dispute and Thamba Simkhang's shiga was taken back and we put our own shidü there. The monks had become very powerful.   

**Q:**  The reason for the gegö's dispute was regarding the gegö's tonggo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the past, what kind of gegö's tonggo did they give? Did they give once or twice?   

**A:**  They gave twice. If the gegö was for the winter chöra, he would become the gegö in the gunchö chemmo, [Tib. དགུན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ]. If he was gegö for the summer chöra, he would become the gegö on the yarchö chemmo, [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ]. They gave one tonggo at the end of the yarchö chemmo and one at about the time of Ganden Ngamjö.   

**Q:**  What did they give on the tonggo?   

**A:**  They had to give 9 traja for these two tonggo. It was very difficult. For one traja, they served 3 teas; on the two all day tonggo, they served 4 teas for the first tsog, 4 teas for the 2nd tsog and 1 tea and one thukpa for the 3rd tsog. This was served on the yarchö gegö. Just before the end of the yarchö, they served 4 teas and 4 teas in between and 4 teas and thukpa in the evening. But there was also an extra traja called gegö düsang [Tib. དུས་བཟང] given on the day before the gegö's düsang when they propitiates the protective deities, kangso, [Tib. བསྐངས་གསོ]. Then just before he leaves the office, he again propitiate the protective deities and gives a traja. Then there was also a traja given just before the gegö left the office which was called shugcha, [Tib. གཞུག་ཇ] which was the last traja. This makes 9 traja.   

**Q:**  Did you have to do these?   

**A:**  When I was gegö I had to do these. The new rule wasn't in effect.[1956].   

**Q:**  How much did it cost you?   

**A:**  At that time, there was an abundant of food stuffs to buy. Now we had to pay 7-8 yuan for a gyama of butter. At that time, it didn't cost 100 sang = 5 yuan for a khe of butter. In Deyang, each traja was calculated to use 5 khe and 16 nyaga of butter for the 1st and 2nd tsog. In the third tsog there was a little less butter because there was the thukba.   

**Q:**  In one day, they used about 20 khe of butter, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [Note. so for one day's traja need about 17.4 khe of butter-then for the 2nd all day also 17.4 khe of butter and then for the remaining 3 also 17.4 so total butter needed is 52.2 khe of butter-- in one butter load, martang, [Tib. མར་ལྟང] the largest is 12 khe, so he needed 4-5 martang].   

**Q:**  So, you used this amount twice, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then there was two day kangso and one day for the shugja. Later when they reduced the gegö's tonggo it was just 2 traja, no thukba. It was easy then. It changed soon after the gegö trouble. After the trouble, the common monks held the tsondu and visited the jiso even at night.   

**Q:**  This new gegö rule was it before or after the Chinese came?   

**A:**  At the time of the abbot Dzogchen, the Chinese came. It was after the Chinese arrived before they fired the cannons. I think it was about 1951. I remember seeing a few Chinese.   

**Q:**  When you gave the tonggo, was it the old rule or the new one?   

**A:**  It was the old rule. [Note: I think his statement that he did the old system in 1956 is wrong. He must have done in the new system?]   

**Q:**  How old were you when you became the gegö?   

**A:**  I was 37 years of age.   

**Q:**  When you were gegö, had the Dalai Lama gone to China yet?   

**A:**  He had already come back from China. That was in 1956.   

**Q:**  You gave a geshe tonggo, right?   

**A:**  That was on that year when I became the gegö.   

**Q:**  What did you serve for your geshe tonggo?   

**A:**  I gave more than the normal geshe's tonggo. I served rice gruel. The rice was measured in a dre called Jagdre, [Tib. ལྕགས་བྲེ] and I used 115 jagdre.   

**Q:**  Jagdre is bigger than the normal dre, right?   

**A:**  It is much bigger. [Trindola: this was a little less than 2 loads, tang, [Tib. ལྟང] 1 jagdre is about = to a little more than today's one gyama.]. The butter was 20-25 khe only for the gruel. I served very good butter tea twice for two days, and 5 khe and 16 nyaga was used for each of the 4 teas in one traja and I gave thukba once. The traja was normally served in the assembly hall but for the geshe exam, damja [Tib. དམ་བཅའ] the person sits for the damja and all the other geshe one by one would debate with him. This was done for both days in the Deyang Chöra.   

**Q:**  How about the alms?   

**A:**  It was up to you what amount you wanted to give. It was okay even if you didn't give the alms, but there was nobody who didn't give alms. In the 13th Dalai lama's document it says it is all right to give tsampa soup, but all give rice gruel. For the damja, we used about 12 khe of butter for two days and it was held that the chöra and monks would bring smaller bowls. And I hired dobdo and that tea was churned and put in kettles.   

**Q:**  Was it one time tsog?   

**A:**  Yes, it started at noon and ended just before the sunset and we debated.   

**Q:**  How much did you give for alms?   

**A:**  I was proud of my alms. At this time, in trasang, dayang was plentiful and I gave each monk 1 dayang. I changed Tibetan money [15 sang for 1 dayang] into dayang. This was for tratsang monks. Then in the tsogchen I gave 1 sang per monk. I didn't have to do this, but I did. I also gave Hamdong khamtsen 1 sang for each monk.   

**Q:**  You got this from a sponsor?   

**A:**  I had a rich friend and he said he would lend me as much money as I needed for my geshe tonggo, although I had to pay the interest.   

**Q:**  How much dotse did you borrow all total.   

**A:**  I borrowed 1,300 or 3,000 dotse, I'm not sure. After the revolt, the debt was still there. The Chinese said that we were not allowed to repay it, but I did. I gave my better monk's robe and rug etc to the lender to square the debt thinking that I would commit negativity if I didn't pay the loan.   

**Q:**  When your gegen died, did you take your own gidru?   

**A:**  When my gegen died, there were two other gidru in the shag. I became the gegen of the shagtsang. I also took one young gidru of my own.   

**Q:**  How did you manage your livelihood?   

**A:**  Later the two other gidru separated. They are both alive, one is in Sangphu [Tib. གསང་ཕུ] and the other is in Jarag [Tib. སྦྱར་རག]. I was pechawa so I was not allowed to do tailoring or going to villages since I was a pechawa and I just depended on the alms and the salary.   

**Q:**  What about going to perform rituals?   

**A:**  I was not allowed to do that until I finished geshe. The main source of my income for my geshe tonggo was my family, who was very rich. They gave a lot of things like silver ware and copper ware to the lender to help repay the debt and told the lender to fix the prices. I also gave and sold a lot of my furniture to repay this.   

**Q:**  Could a pechawa become chöndze or chatsü?   

**A:**  No. We were not allowed. It was because chöndze and chatsü have the privilege to not go to tsog chöra, even if they didn't come to the tsog, they [gegö] were not allowed to say anything. So he won't debate the tsenyi well. The pechawa always had to go to the tsog chöra, so pechawa didn't become chöndze or chatsü. After one became a pechawa, one was waiting to become geshe. But the pechawa have to do the gegö, which was a tax of tratsang. Since the Geshe gave the tonggo, called dreram, to buy out the shöndre, then they were in the line to become gegö.   

**Q:**  What amount of alms did you get in Mönlam and Tsongchö when you were the gegö?   

**A:**  About 25 dotse at Mönlam, but very little at tsongchö. When I was a kid, I got 12-13 sang. This was very good for then. During tsongchö, at winter session we got one tranka. On the commemorating days of death of the Dalai Lamas, kunchö, [Tib. སྐུ་མཆོད] then we get one trangga garpo and on the day of the religious procession that takes place on the 30th of the 2nd lunar month, Tsongchö Sebang [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་འབྲེང] we also get one trangga garpo. These two distributions were given by government. Otherwise at Tsonchö there weren't many sponsors.   

**Q:**  Just before the revolt they printed a coin of 5 sang called Ngatrang, [Tib. ལྔ་ཏྲམ], right?   

**A:**  It looks like the trangga garpo.   

**Q:**  Otherwise, what did you get? From Deyang, you got 6 khe of grain as grain salary, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And from jiso we got one bo, [Tib. འབོ] which held 10 dre, [Tib. ncu 'bo] in summer and one bo which holds 10 dre in winter which was paid to all the monks in Drepung.   

**Q:**  Also there was Hamdong's butter salary and jiso gives cookies khabse and brown sugar, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And the jiso also gave butter at Chamön. [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན]   

**Q:**  Tell me about how the three chöra each day were held like the morning session, midday sessions etc?   

**A:**  First at dawn, there was mangja in the tsogchen. After this let out, then the morning session's [Tib. ཞོགས་མཆོད] gong would be beaten from the roof of the tratsang by the chabril. Then the monks went wearing their cloak for the morning session and sat at the back of the tratsang assembly hall. Then the gegö went and stood in front of the chöra's door wearing his cloak and hat and then the monks would say the gegö was there now and then they would file into the chöra in order of seniority wearing their cloaks and putting their hat onto their shoulders. Actually the seniority isn't really followed. The gegö's standing there was theoretically to see whether all the monks were there or not, but this wasn't really done. Then after all the monks have entered, the gegö enters. Inside the chöra, they at first didn't sit in their grade, but rather sat all together. The umdze was sitting facing them. Then they started saying prayers and they did the usual prayers. After the prayers, the umdze chemmo would put on his hat and the other monks put on their hats and rearrange themselves into grade. The pechawa stayed in groups of two and the lagyüba sat in the grade.   

**Q:**  Did the pechawa debate at the morning session?   

**A:**  Not now, but later they debated. When the gegö said that there was traja after the morning session and then the umdze and the monks wore their hat and then leave. After that, the pechawa started debating in groups of two and the lagyüba gradually would be send back from the chöra by the gegö. They would leave in order.   

**Q:**  After this, the lagyüba stayed in the chöra, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the lagyüba had a grade to stay there and then they would be sent back. The gegö first would go through the motions of doing his circuit of the chöra and grade.   

**Q:**  How long would it take?   

**A:**  The whole session including the joint prayers and debates takes only about 1/2 hr because we had to go to traja. The pechawa would debate until the gong was again beaten from the roof of the tratsang by chabril, this time to signify that it was time to go to traja. At this time the pechawa went to their shag to get their wooden bowls, [Tib. ཚོགས་ཕོར] and their tsamba bag, tshokhu, [Tib. ཚོགས་ཁུག]. We then left our boots in the shag and return to the chöra and again to debate for awhile. We had left our cloak in the chöra. Then when all the pechawa were assembled there, the gegö would go to the dukhang and they would follow. At the dukhang, the gegö wearing his hat and cloak stood by the entrance of the dukhang, gomchor, [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར].   

**Q:**  At that time, the lagyüba had not yet entered the hall, right?   

**A:**  They were wearing their cloaks and staying down there and they didn't need to come to the chöra. There would be some of the older lagyüba on the gomchor, but most hadn't yet come. Then the older lagyüba and pechawa enter the dukhang together and the traja starts. There we get 4 teas, say prayers and then it lets out. We then take our hat, cloak, and bowls back to our shag. Then there was some time, it was the time for the pechawa to go to the chöra. The pechawa and some lagyüba went to this.   

**Q:**  At this time did they beat the gong?   

**A:**  No gong beating, but some child monks yelled the chuke [Tib.ཆུ་སྐད] and this was the signal that the midday session, nyinchö, [Tib. ཉིན་ཆོས]. This time we just entered without waiting and sat in one's own grade.   

**Q:**  Could you enter whenever you want to?   

**A:**  Yes. We just went to one's grade. After most of the monks have arrived, the gegö and umdze arrive. The pechawa start debating and the lagyüba sat behind them in their appropriate grade. When all have arrived, the gegö and umdze put on their hats and then the chabril beats the gong. When this was heard, the monks would rearrange themselves into a single group. Then prayers would be chanted, and after this the monks would again rearrange themselves into grade. The pechawa would again start debating in groups of two.   

**Q:**  Did the pechawa and the lagyüba stay in the same grade?   

**A:**  The pechawa sat in the front and the lagyüba sit at the behind though they sit in the same grade. Then like before the lagyüba will gradually leave and the pechawa will stay debating. They could stay till dark if they wish. The gegö and lagyüba would leave together like I mentioned above. Then after the sun has just about set, from the roof they would again yell the chuke and the evening ritual, kurim, [Tib. སྐུ་རིམ] will start.   

**Q:**  Did the lagyüba have to go to the kurim?   

**A:**  Yes. But, since the lagyüba did not have to debate tsenyi, they have more leisure time. No special messages are sent to tell them to come. If the pechawa didn't come to the chöra, they got scolded. The monks file into chöra and sit in their grade and debated. Then when the monks have arrived there, again from the roof the gong was beaten and the monks reassemble into a group. Then they did prayers. Then after the prayers are done, they monks rearrange themselves into grade, and debate in groups of two. Then as before, the lagyüba leave and the pechawa can stay all night debating if they want.   

**Q:**  Usually, as an average, how many monks go to these three chöra when you were the gegö?   

**A:**  Not many. Few lagyüba go and chöndze and chatsül and monks who finished the gegö's term don't need to come. So there were about 60. The child monks in the first grade like khatog grammar etc have to go. Including these about 80 go. Basically, only pechawa.   

**Q:**  Are these three sessions had about the same number of monks?   

**A:**  Yes, there were about the same number.   

**Q:**  When they did the kurim, did they have a special way of doing it like the gegö standing there?   

**A:**  There wasn't.   

**Q:**  Did gegö stand all the time?   

**A:**  No, he stood in front of chöra for shogchö and at the traja like inviting the monks in.   

**Q:**  Did the monks go in by seniority?   

**A:**  At traja, the monks went in by seniority.   

**Q:**  Could you now tell us about how the Deyang rungkhang caught fire? Was it because the deity caused the harm?   

**A:**  Probably, the harm was not caused by the deity.   

