# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin, [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he describes the dispute during the time of the abbot Legdrub and the tonggo identifying the gegö as the root of the problem. There are details about the members of tsondu (council) beating the gegö and issues surrounding the deaths of the monks after the beatings. He discusses the aftermath of these deaths, and describes the end of the conflict. Finally, there is a discussion of the main work of the gegö, including the role and its responsibilities.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_01/M_0002_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  I am 71.   

**Q:**  You are from Deyang, [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Are you from Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was born in Phenpo, [Tib. འཕན་པོ] and I arrived in Lhasa at age 4. My father at this time was the jiso's nangsen and the jiso called him and then we settled in Lhasa. Rinchen Lamsang, [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་ལམ་བཟང] talking: Geshe La's [Rinchen Tharchin] parent's house was here and he stayed in the monastery during his childhood.   

**Q:**  Two of you were under the same abbot's time, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I am doing some research on Drepung and I have asked Lamsang la about the nyertsang and jiso those things and he doesn't clearly remember about the events took place in Deyang. Lamsang: The main thing was about the disputes that took place between the gegö during the time of abbot Legdrub.[Tib. ལེགས་གྲུབ]. I told them about this but I didn't know the root of the matter, so please explain it in detail about the root cause. At that time, there were Shenyen Thuwang, [Tib. བསྙེན་གཉེན་ཐུབ་དབང་ལ] and the Gen Mönlam La, [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་ལགས] and the abbot, the ex-shengo, the chandzö, right?   

**A:**  The root of the trouble was regarding the tonggo of the gegö in the tratsang. Gegö tongggo was very difficult. The gegö position was basically held by the poor common monks. This was because those who had income and wealth would take the special right "thön', so that they did not have to do it. Lamsang also took the title of chatsü, [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ] and didn't need to be the gegö.   

**Q:**  If you took the chatsü, you don't need to be the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Lamsang: I got the chatsü title because it was given as a reward to my late gegen by the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did you give the tonggo after six months or before that?   

**A:**  The gegö's tonggo was given just before the six months term ends. The gegö had to give the monks 2 all day traja. Each day there were three assemblies, [Tib. ཚོགས་དུས]. The gegö was very hard and they couldn't give the tonggo. At this time, the monks petitioned the abbot that these gegö tonggo were very difficult to give. And the gegö were all from the poor monks. So please reduce the requirements of the tonggo. This was presented in the tratsang tsondu. In the tsondu, there was the abbot and there were eloquent abbot's partners. They said this can not be. Then the common monks put a great effort. At that time, they held a tsondu gyeba [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་པ] for changing the gegö and the old and the new gegö were both at the tsondu. On this day the monks met separately in the chöra and then the common monks rushed up to the tsondu to make the petition. Then some people stopped them and they [tsondu] said that this was not going to be okay. And they caught the monks who came to petition and they also caught the old and the new gegö and they beat the new gegö with switches and they were shut in the room and they also shut in the old gegö. The new gegö died and then the old gegö was shut in and beaten with switches and died after 3 or 4 days. The main complain was that the gegö could not give the tonggo, so they requested to reduce, [Tib. ཆག་ཆ] the tonggo. The monks had the reason for rising up to insist on changing this because the 13th Dalai Lama gave Deyang the charter, jayig, [Tib. བཅའ་ཡིག] and in this, it was not written what the gegö had to do. Later they changed the content of the jayig and increased the tonggo and made the gegö to give that tonggo.   

**Q:**  Who ordered the beating with switches?   

**A:**  The main one was the abbot and there were a few partners. And they were very active where the other tsondu members didn't have much [power] and they were watching it.   

**Q:**  There was no dispute between the old and new gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were standing on one side because both of them were poor monks.   

**Q:**  The common monks were standing behind the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The common monks were not allowed to go to the tsondu, they met in the chöra. Then when the monks rushed up, some tsondu members carried sticks and came to beat the monks.   

**Q:**  Who settled it?   

**A:**  This is not a matter that the shengo can settle. The new gegö [called Chöndzin La [Tib. ཆོས་འཛིན་ལགས] died and the junior shengo had to notify the government saying that the gegö died this morning. This was done, and then the next morning he had to go and say that the older gegö Khyenden Chognang [Tib. མཁྱེན་ལྡན་མཆོག་སྣང] had died after the beating. Then the dewashung ordered the 2 shengo to settle it. These two had been killed and if you kill someone you can't stay in the monastery. So the abbot Legdrub, [Tib. ལེགས་གྲུབ] and the abbot's gegen who was the ex-shengo [Tib. ཞལ་ཟུར], the labrang chandzö, the ex-gegö Shenyen Thuwangla, [Tib. བཤེས་གཉེན་ཐུབ་དབང་ལགས] and ex-gegö Mönlam la, [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་ལགས]. About 7 people were expelled and beaten with switches. The decision came very fast from the shengo. They were beaten with switches at the tsogchen stone floor. They were then clothed in white chuba and expelled. That day, the lords of these 7 monks were summoned and they were handed over to their lords and sent back with them to the countryside.   

**Q:**  Was anyone from monks expelled?   

**A:**  No because the justice was on the common monks' side.   

**Q:**  So the tsondu members were expelled, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the ones who supported the abbot were expelled.   

**Q:**  The reason why the abbot beat the gegö was because the gegö said that they can't give the tonggo, right?   

**A:**  Yes and the new gegö was kind of eloquent and reported very strongly on the tsondu and he was holding the jayig issued by the 13th Dalai Lama's jayig and the gegö also had a lot of power. And they beat the gegö while he was holding the jayig. The new gegö was saying we can give the tonggo whatever was written in the jayig and you cannot increase the tonggo that is not written in the jayig.   

**Q:**  Were they saying that the two gegö were the ringleader of that case? Lamsang: They were saying that they were the ones who first raised the issue.   

**Q:**  Did they beat the common monks with switches?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. But the common monks were very strong then. So they couldn't arrest and beat them because the justice was on their side.   

**Q:**  Did they beat the gegö on the same day of the tsondu?   

**A:**  It was on the same day where they called them to the tsondu and beat them on the roof top. Lamsang: At this time, didn't the new gegö chöndzin la lay down and said, go ahead and beat me? He was very tough and was holding the jayig. But they ignored the jayig and beat him.   

**A:**  Actually, when one is holding the jayig, no one is allowed to punish him even if he committed some crime. One would have to wait until after his term is over and then settle it.   

**Q:**  After this what happened with the tonggo? Lamsang; one of the gegö who died was called Khyenden Choglang, [Tib. མཁྱེན་ལྡན་མཆོག་གླང], right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the old one.   

**Q:**  How did they settle it?   

**A:**  After that, the tsondu met for many times and finally they decided that they will follow the 13th Dalai Lama's jayig and give the tonggo according to the jayig. Finally, the common monks won the case.   

**Q:**  At this time, did the people from laji come to the tratsang tsondu?   

**A:**  No. Laji was not involved in that. Lamsang: After that, was the new abbot Rinchen Gyantsen la, [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས]?   

**A:**  No. It was Shenyen Tsöndrü La, [Tib. bshes gnyen brtson 'grus lahs]. Lamsang: and after him was Rinchen Gyentsen la, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When was this? Was it after the Sera War?   

**A:**  It was before the Sera War. Lamsang: it has been two abbot terms before that.   

**Q:**  Was the regent Taktra or Reting?   

**A:**  It was Taktra.   

**Q:**  So it was in 1941-42 43. Lamsang: They were expelled from the monastery in the morning when they paid us the grain salary.   

**Q:**  Was there a fixed time of the grain salary?   

**A:**  Lamsang: No. It depends when ever the nyertsang had the time. [Note: the dobdo said it was when he was 27 so that would be 1945]   

**Q:**  Who were those people who beat the monks?   

**A:**  Usually the thabyog did that. If the gegö was very angry, he would beat them. But at this time it was the tsondu members themselves. Lamsang: Yes the ones who rushed to beat them were; Shenyen Thuwang, Mönlam la.   

**A:**  And there was chandzö Gyentsen Legtshog, [Tib. rgyan mtsan leg tshogs]. Lamsang: Was there the abbot's gegen the ex-shengo?   

**A:**  Yes he was there. Lamsang: And there was the shengo Tsendzin, [Tib. ཚེ་འཛིན་ལགས]. Those four the people who beat them.   

**Q:**  I heard from some dobdo that when they were whipped, it was not bleeding, how did they whip them which caused them to die?   

**A:**  They were not whipped. I was in Lhasa that day and when I returned that night, the tsondu members were holding big lamps and they were taking out the switches called tsargyug, [Tib. ཚར་རྒྱུག] from a room where they store wood called [Tib. ཤིང་ཁང]. At that moment, they were too aggressive and beat them with the switches very severely. So the switches broke and the pieces of wood point stuck into their fleshes and their legs were severely swollen and didn't look like human leg and their leg became like beams. They beat them on their lower part of the body. I and my gegen were among of the common monks and my gegen had just passed his geshe exam and was about to give his tonggo. I went to help the new gegö as his servant and at that moment, he was almost dying. At this time, the shengo's nangma came for the inspection. But he was no longer like a person, [Tib. མིའི་བཟོ་ཏ་མི་འདུག].   

**Q:**  How many times did they beat them with the switches?   

**A:**  They didn't have the time to count it. Lamsang: They beat them like 100-200-300-400 times. Otherwise, people won't die so easily. They might have hit them and also poked them with the switches.   

**Q:**  They were angry because the monks talked back to them, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the main work of the gegö of Deyang which you did?   

**A:**  The main responsibility is to check up and over see the tonggo of the chabu and nyertsang like the traja and the income from the various shiga. There is a big book in which they are all listed. You had to keep looking in it and see if they have done the tonggo as specified. There were two gegö; one for the monks gathering in summer for the debate, yarchö, [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས] and the winter monks gathering in summer for the debate, günchö, [Tib. དགུན་ཆོས] and the gegö had to check whether the tonggo were given completely. And if some tonggo is missing, then the gegö would tell them to give the tonggo.   

**Q:**  Was it done with the uchö?   

**A:**  No, the gegö does it by himself.   

**Q:**  Then what else do the gegö do?   

**A:**  The gegö had the power and was in charge of tratsang discipline. In Deyang, we didn't have the custom of any money fines, but the gegö would criticize or scold, [Tib. བཀའ་སྒྱུར] the monks like who don't come to the tsog and the chöra. And in the tsog, the gegö would stand up and give the orders and enforce discipline and hit them a little bit with the stick.   

**Q:**  Does the gegö have the authority to expel the monks?   

**A:**  Yes, he does, but no authority to get the monks admitted in the monastery. The abbot has the authority to enroll the monks in the tratsang. The gegö is the one who holds the jayig.   

**Q:**  In Deyang, was there the rotation system between geshe and lagyüpa to become the gegö in Gomang?   

**A:**  No. Lamsang: when you give the tonggo to avoid shöndre then you become the gegö according to the line of the monks who gave the tonggo. And you will know in such and such year you will become gegö if the people in line didn't die.   

**Q:**  What kind of tonggo did the gegö have to give?   

**A:**  The gegö had to serve 11 teas and 1 thukpa for a whole day on three times tsog. They would give this tonggo twice; one when at the first time and one just before the terms is going to be over and this was called Gegö Düsang. Altogether, it was 24 teas and the thukpa.   

**Q:**  Was the thukpa, rice gruel, mingtag, [Tib. མིང་བཏགས]?   

**A:**  It was up to you what ever kind of thukpa you wanted to give. Lamsang: Geshe la gave a very good explanation on the even of the gegö.   

**A:**  At that time, it was kind of due to the karmic relation that the common monks became so strong and they press the heads down.   

**Q:**  Supposing there were about 500 monks in Deyang, how many of them were the common monks and the how many of them were like the lene and chöndze etc?   

**A:**  There were little over 400 monks and there were more common monks like 300. Probably, there were not more than 100 who were tsondu members and the ones who took the thön.   

**Q:**  In Deyang, do the geshe and the pechawa have to do gegö?   

**A:**  Unless a pechawa become a gegö, he is not allowed to take the title of chatsü. Lamsang: That's why Geshe la was also a gegö. Geshe La [Rinchen Tharchen] and I were under the same abbot's time, but I acted like cunning and tried to go up without doing anything and my title was given by the tratsang. If the tratsang didn't give me the title I would ask for it. But Geshe La went through the seniority and gave the geshe tonggo and passed the Geshe exam and he was going to be the first candidate of the abbot if the society had not became upside down. At that time, he became the gegö and he passed Geshe called Pölog, [Tib. ?]   

**Q:**  What is Pölog?   

**A:**  Pölog is a unique title of geshe and he was the only one who got that title in our tratsang which was almost like the title of the trüku in the bigger tratsang.   

