# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, there are discussions of getsü vow, thön, issues of the gidru not doing shöndre, as well as explanations of the gegö's loans and debts. There is also discussion of how the chabu was selected and the responsibilities of the jama and chabril.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_03/M_0002_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  When you became the rabjung, [Tib. རབ་བྱུང] you had not yet gotten the getsül vow. For the getsül vow you could ask an abbot or the Yongdzin of the Dalai Lama or the Dalai Lama and Tri Rimpoche, [Tib. ཁྲི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and you had to stay on long lines. On that day, you took the red cushion called Dinga, [Tib. འདིང་བ], mala and some more things. And the lama would give the vow and from that day you got the getsül vow. Once you have taken these vows, if you don't behave well and don't keep the vow well, then you can be expelled. Then later you will take the gelong vows.   

**Q:**  What are the various kinds of thön those who have special privilege, [Tib. དམིགས་བསལ་དབང་ཆ]? Is thön and special privilege same?   

**A:**  Those who have the thön are the people who have special privilege for example, after you did the chatsü and chöndze, then your special privilege is that you don't have to do the gegö.   

**Q:**  Are the positions of chatsü and chöndze called thön?   

**A:**  No they aren't called thön.   

**Q:**  What is called thön?   

**A:**  When you give a tonggo to get exempted or avoided from doing something like shöndre, this is called thön.   

**Q:**  When you finish the gegö and become the ex-gegö, do they call it having thön?   

**A:**  Yes they call it thön and say that you have the thön of gegö.   

**Q:**  What kind of special privilege did this thön have?   

**A:**  There is no real special privilege except for getting into the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Did they have the special privilege to keep 2 or 3 gidru who didn't have to do the shöndre?   

**A:**  Among the ex-gegö, there are the both the lagyüba and the pechawa. Those pechawa geshe are allowed to keep many gidru. We have no custom like the gidru did not have to do the shöndre.   

**Q:**  Like the nyertsang, did they have the privilege to keep gidru?   

**A:**  They have the privilege to keep gidru, but did not have the privilege that they do not have do the shöndre.   

**Q:**  When you become the ex-gegö, did you have the privilege of wearing their clothes?   

**A:**  In general, monks are not allowed to wear sleeves or the boots called somba [Tib. ཟོན་པ] [villager's type of boots]. But when the monks go into the villages, they just go against the rule and wear these. At Jang günchö it is very cold and they go there in 11th month and return in 12th month, so the on the way the geshe surreptitiously wear garments and sompa boots. The chabu and nyertsang are also not allowed to wear those clothes.   

**Q:**  How did those people who have special privilege get alms and salary? Could they send a person to get their alms?   

**A:**  The nyertsang and chabu had special privilege and they don't have to go to the tsog. They sent their gidru and after the tsog was finished they got their alms and salary outside the main gate, gomchor, [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] when their name was read out. They didn't have to go in person. This was the same for alms and salary [in Deyang]. Other monks had to go in person to the tsog.   

**Q:**  Those who gave the tonggo to buy up shöndre, did they have to go to the tsog?   

**A:**  They had to go to the tsog.   

**Q:**  What about one called getting the share, kelen, [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན]?   

**A:**  These monks came to the assembly hall before the tsog was finished and at the time when alms were being given out, they will get their shares. They had to come in person. These are the people without special privilege. They had to ask the gegö for permission not to attend tsog and get the kelen in order to be eligible for getting kelen and mostly the gegö would say yes. In the big tratsang probably they didn't have to ask such permission and they sat on the stone floor to get the alms.   

**Q:**  Who were the ones with special privilege? The chatsü, chöndze, ex-gegö, ex-nyertsang, the incumbent nyertsang, abbot, chabu, ex-abbot ex-chabu, labrang chandzö and then who else? Was the lama shungnepa there?   

**A:**  Yes, lama shungnepa was there if he had done the gegö. If he hasn't done gegö, he was not allowed to come to the tshondu meetings. Even the geshe can't come to tshondu unless they have finished the gegö. The chatsü would become nyertsang and the chöndze would become chabu.   

**Q:**  Is lama shungnepa a kind of monk's obligation?   

**A:**  It was kind of obligation. It goes by the rank of geshe who was the oldest in the seniority.   

**Q:**  What is the duty of lama shungnepa?   

**A:**  Each year, there would be 2-3-4 new geshe. At the time, they gave the geshe tonggo in the tsog and the lama shungnepa have to recite lot of prayers from the main text. At this time, the geshe gives a meal to the lama shungnepa, the gegö and the umdze.   

**Q:**  The gegö gives two tonggo?   

**A:**  In the past before the Deyang trouble. The gegö had to give 9 traja. Later when the abbot was expelled, it was reduced to only two traja.   

**Q:**  When they serve 9 traja, did they have to serve both the tea and the thukpa?   

**A:**  Probably, that was done before the Sera War. There were all day tsog in the tratsang [Tib. ཉིན་འཁྱོངས]. We gave one traja on the 14th of the 6th month and when we do the ritual to propitiate the deity, kangso, [Tib. བསྐངས་གསོ]. And on the 15th we give the tonggo for the whole day. In 11th month, one day just before handing over, we would give the same tonggo. There were 3 traja each of these days so this made 9 traja.   

**Q:**  Was this given before or after becoming gegö.   

**A:**  It was given after one starts to be the gegö.   

**Q:**  When was the change over of gegö?   

**A:**  It was during the great summer gathering for the debate, yarchö chemo, [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] on 5th month 15-16 of month when they held the meeting and the old gegö resigned and the new gegö take the position. They gave this tonggo when taking over and the handing over the gegö. And just before finishing the gegö, they had to give a tea called the ending tea, shugja [Tib. གཞུག་ཇ]   

**Q:**  Where did the income for doing this come from?   

**A:**  He had no special funds for this. There was the extra share but nothing else. Therefore the trouble over the gegö tonggo was because of this.   

**Q:**  Did the gegö have some endowment?   

**A:**  No.   

**A:**  So how did the monks manage to do this because they needed a lot of butter?   

**A:**  They had to take loans to do this. Most ex- gegö had debts to pay off. [laughter] Let me tell you an incident. This happened when I was young. There was a monk who was told it was his turn to be the gegö. He tried to but couldn't get excused from it and he was very poor and couldn't afford the tonggo. So in his courtyard there was a room where the tratsang's butter was stored. So he stole a load of butter from the storeroom and took it into his shag and hid it in his storage where he kept is dung [Tib. ལྕི་ཁང] Then he said he will do the gegö. When they noticed that the butter was lost, many monks had suspicion that he stole it. And the child monk from the neighbors shag would tease him saying "Uncle, didn't you see the load of butter? Don't you have the butter load in your shag?". On day, people knew about this and in the evening when they were holding the ritual, kurim, [Tib. སྐུ་རིམ] -it was just getting dark-so while he was at kurim, the shengo and nangma seized him and tied him with a black rope and then beat him with switches. Then they put him in the "jail."   

**Q:**  Did they expel him?   

**Q:**  He was expelled because he stole. I saw this myself. If you are okay economically, you can do the gegö and then be the ex-gegö and get into the tsondu. You have a bigger name, otherwise no profit.   

**Q:**  I heard that when the sponsors would give money gift when they came to ask to read the list for requesting prayers, kyabtho, [Tib. སྐྱབ་ཐོ]?   

**A:**  No. They gave the kyabtho wrapped in a khata to the gegö, but no money. The gegö keeps the khata. We also keep the kyabtho's (paper) which we use to plaster the roof.   

**Q:**  Did it sometimes happen that if the gegö can't read well, the chabril did it by standing behind him?   

**A:**  Ha ha. [laughter] Yes. You had asked a lot. I remember the gegö before me who couldn't read printing script, ujen [Tib. དབུ་ཅན] or the written form, umey [Tib. དབུ་མེད]. So when he had to read kyabtho, he couldn't read so the chabri read the kyabtho after the gegö said, "Today so and so sponsor is giving alms" Then the chabri read the actual kyabtho.   

**Q:**  Was there a custom of the gegö begging for donation for the tonggo?.   

**A:**  Yes. The gegö would go to Lhasa after New Years to beg from the kudrak who had relation with the Deyang.   

**Q:**  Did most of them give the donation?   

**A:**  Yes they did. Then just before the revolt the kudrak said that it was not good to beg for the donation and all the Deyang's sponsor collected some donation and started an endowment. But we didn't get the money because it was just before the revolt.   

**Q:**  When did you do the gegö.   

**A:**  Not long before the revolt when I was 37 years old.   

**Q:**  How was the chabu selected? I heard that one from ex-nyertsang, one ex-gegö, one from the common monks and one from the chöndze. I heard that they select some candidates from among the common monks.   

**A:**  In the past, I remember that one chöndze called Tempa, [Tib. བསྟན་པ] and one called Pöpö became the chabu and there was one from the nyertsang, one from ex-gegö and one from the common monks.   

**Q:**  How were they selected? Did the common monks have the power?   

**A:**  The tsondu gyendzom meets and does this. They selected 2-3 candidates from among each of the above mentioned sources and there would be 12-13 people and they wrote the names on the paper and it was given to the protective deity called Thamba Shanggo [Tib. འདན་འབག་ཞང་པོ]. Then the oracle went into trance and puts his seal on the names and these are the ones selected.   

**Q:**  Did the common monks meet?   

**A:**  The common monks didn't meet. Only the tsondu meets upstairs.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu get changed?   

**A:**  Yes, their term was 6 years.   

**Q:**  Did the pechawa have to do the shidü, cashier and drunyer, [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར]?   

**A:**  They never did shidü or drunyer. Later they did start some geshe doing the cashier. They were appointed to do this.   

**Q:**  Did the geshe have to be the büdü, [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] for collecting offering and donations?   

**A:**  No. But there were 2 monasteries where two geshe were sent as lama. One in Tsang Tingye, [Tib. གཏིང་སྐྱེས] and at Sharbumba [Tib. ཤར་འབུམ་པ]. These were not the best geshe but the secondary geshe and they left the better geshe to become the abbot.   

**Q:**  Do you remember the various Deyang ngünyer: One is the chibgyur ngünyer. [Tib. chips sgyur dngul gnyer] working for the Dalai Lama's visit to Drepung. One working on the chatsü endowment and one is Tentso ngünyer [Tib. བསྟན་མཚོ]. What is the fourth one?   

**A:**  Tentso ngünyer was a new one and his gegen was called Tenpa Gyatso [Tib. བསྟན་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. So it was called Tentso. There was no chatsü ngünyer. I don't remember the other ngünyer.   

**Q:**  Is there a clerk?   

**A:**  No special post. If a chabu needs one, he asks someone to do it.   

**Q:**  What about the jimi [Tib. སྤྱི་མི]?   

**A:**  This is the chabu's servant and the nyertsang's servant. They send him here and there. It is usually a dobdo.   

**Q:**  What are the responsibilities of jama and chabril?   

**A:**  The chabril is mainly the gegö's servant. The chabril takes the gegö's hat from a pillar in the assembly hall and gives it to the gegö when he comes in. The gegö wears it during the tsog and then gives it back to chabril who hand it on pillar again. [then the gegö walks back and forth in tsog carrying a iron stick [Tib. ལྕག་རྒྱུག] Another job of chabril, is to tell the chagde [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ] to which rows they should go to serve tea. The name chabril comes from water. Also, at the end of the tsog he carries water in a vase [Tib. བུམ་པ] around the tsog. In the old times, he would pour water in each monks' hands and monks to rinks their mouth, but later don't do that. In Deyang, the chabril has no power.   

**Q:**  If people come to give alms, do they go to the chabril?   

**A:**  If such a person come to give alms, first he goes to abbot and he makes the decision. Then the abbot would give the order to the gegö saying that such and such sponsor wants to give tonggo on such as such day, is it all right? The reason for asking is that the gegö not only has the 13th Dalai Lama's jayig, but also the list of the tonggo. The gegö says yes. Then the abbot will say its okay, go ahead and make the preparations.   

**Q:**  After you say okay, then would you send the person to the nyertsang?   

**A:**  I would give the message to the abbot and the abbot would give the order to the gegö.   

**Q:**  Where would the sponsor have to go carrying the tea and butter etc?   

**A:**  The sponsor will have some monks he knows who will help him. He will stay in that monk's shag and do the preparation of butter etc. The butter and tea have to be taken to the rungkhang and give them to the jama who is in charge of the tea.   

**Q:**  Who tells the tea servers, chagde, [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ] when to serve tea?   

**A:**  In the tsog- when to serve tea is said by the umdze. He will give a head signal while the prayer is ending. Then the young monks will quickly get up and go to the rungkhang. Then they will get tea from the rungkhang and return and stand in a line by front wall. Then the chabril will say you go to the first row and then you go to the second row and then they serve the tea.   

**Q:**  Do the chabril give the assembly speech, tsogtam, [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ] when the chagde were standing in line?   

**A:**  There is no tsogtam. Chabril didn't have power in Deyang and they are not allowed to say that.   

**Q:**  Can the chabril go into rungkhang?   

**A:**  He can but doesn't have to since he is not involved there. He stand off to one side of the assembly hall. When the tea is served, he has to count the number of ex-gegö who get the grease of the tea. And each 2 ex-gegö get 1 tea container called japtra [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ] equally. The ex-gegö carries a grease container [Tib. ཞག་ཕོར] and the tea server would pour the grease equally to the two ex-gegö. The rest of the monks just get one bowl of tea and there is no grease on it.   

**Q:**  What about thukpa? How did they serve it?   

**A:**  The tea servers are mostly young monks. The thukpa servers are mostly older. Its up to individual if he wants to go. If its rice gruel, thukpa mingtag, [Tib. མིང་བཏགས] each bucket [Tib. ཟོ་ལག] is filled in the rungkhang and set waiting for the monks to come and pick them up. Gomang and Deyang are different.   

**Q:**  Were the thukpa servers dobdo?   

**A:**  In Deyang, there are dobdo and also who are not dobdo. In Gomang there is pushing and fighting etc by the dobdo. In Deyang there is no pushing.   

**Q:**  Do the monks get one ladle or two?   

**A:**  They get two. In Deyang, they put the container on the floor and serve the thukpa but in Gomnag they hold the container in the servers' hand. The first ladle is banged into wooden bowl and if you aren't careful it will be knock out of your hand.   

**Q:**  When you were young who were there in your shag? Was your shagtsang a big one?   

**A:**  No we weren't a big shagtsang. I came to Lhasa at age 4. My gegen used to stay in my house in Lhasa at Mönlam, [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ]. So after Mönlam, when the gegen returned I said I want to go with him and went to Drepung. Then at Tsongchö, [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] Prayer Festival, I returned to Lhasa. Then after tsongchö I went back to monastery with my gegen and that's how I became a monk. At this time, there was the gegen, two older gidru and me; 4 people. The 2 older gidru were good in pecha but died before they passed the geshe.   

**Q:**  Did you like to learn pecha right away?   

**A:**  I knew the alphabets before I went to the monastery because my father was Kashag's sweeper and he taught me. So when I got to the monastery, probably I could learn some, so everyone said "oh he has a good memory". Then my father bought up the shöndre for me and I started studying tsenyi in the takrig grade and I became the pechawa. At this time, the butter was cheap, 1 gyama of butter was 1 sang. Money was valuable then.   

**Q:**  How old where you when you were gegö?   

**A:**  I was 37. It was just before I passed my geshe exam. It was in the same year I passed geshe and became the gegö. I became the gegö in summer and passed the geshe exam in that winter.   

