# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he describes details of when he was a gegö and the fights that occurred during this time and how they were settled. Also included are criticisms of the tshog and descriptions of conflicts settled by the shengo. There are descriptions of activities during the chöthog and reasons for prayers in thsog. There are also descriptions of the differences between the prayers in the shag and tshog. In conclusion there is a discussion of the issues of gegö's disciplinary power, the nature of friendships in the monastery, and the male homosexual custom among the monks.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_05/M_0002_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What were some of the incidents when you were gegö, for example the fights you mentioned and how you beat them with switches? Tell us in detail. How many monks did you beat?   

**A:**  There were about 3-4 of them who were child monks.   

**Q:**  Who beat them with switches?   

**A:**  We call the thabyog, but they couldn't come right away because they lived in Thambag, [Tib. དན་འབག] long way down there. So I told some monks to hold their heads and feet and the gegö beat them.   

**Q:**  Did they fight in the tsog? What was the reason of the fight?   

**A:**  It took place after the tshog when the monks went to urinate, a fight broke out. Then I seized them because I knew those monks. There wasn't any big reason.   

**Q:**  Did they hit them with fists or knives?   

**A:**  They were fighting with fists and rocks. No one carried knives.   

**Q:**  Can you give an example of criticizing or scolding someone in the tshog by going in front of him?   

**A:**  In my experience, there was a monk who was smart and we had hope for him to become good. But he didn't learn the pecha well and he wasn't coming to the tshog and chöra much and he was becoming spoiled. So I threatened and scolded him, "you are doing too much and you are not coming to the tsog and chöra" [Tib. ཁྱོད་རང་ཙོགས་ཆོས་རར་མ་ཡོང་པར། ཞེད་པོ་ཅིག་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འདུག་ག] and I warned him that if you don't behave well in the future, I will make you suffer severely. Otherwise, we didn't have the custom of punishing like a money fine.   

**Q:**  Who were the ones you were allowed to bring the container of the grease, shaglug, [Tib. ཞགས་བླུག] to the tshog? One was the ex-gegö, right?   

**A:**  The ex-nyertsang was allowed to bring it. Once they came to the tsondu, they were allowed to bring the small shaglug made from copper.   

**Q:**  Were the incumbent gegö and umdze allowed to bring this?   

**A:**  Yes. The gegö brought a very large shaglug, but the umdze's shaglug was not that big. The chabril would merge two tea containers, chabdra, [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ] in one and bring it to the gegö to flatter the gegö. Chabril was gegö's servant. There was one ladle of tea in the container and the ex-gegö only gets one container or ladle. Usually, the tea server, chagde, [Tib. ཕག་བདེ] would divide the grease when they served the tea.   

**Q:**  Were you in a khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes. I was in Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen which belonged to Gomang. Our tratsang didn't have khamtsen because it was a small tratsang. So we could join wherever we want to, but most of us joined Hamdong. And some also joined the Pompora, [Tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག].   

**Q:**  Did you have to do the shöndre for the Hamdong?   

**A:**  No, because we were separate tratsang.   

**Q:**  Why did they let you join their khamtsen? Did they have any benefit?   

**A:**  If there was a very big call for the shöndre say like doing constructions etc for the Hamdong Khamtsen, then we had to go, but not for the day in and day out things.   

**Q:**  What was the difference between joining and not joining the khamtsen??   

**A:**  There was no problem if we didn't join the khamtsen. If we joined, they wouldn't say that it was not allowed. We joined it because we got the alms in the khamtsen, if we didn't join, we would not get the alms.   

**Q:**  You also got the butter salary, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we got the Hamdong butter salary which was about 6 ngyaga = 2 jin paid just before the New Year. This was very famous. There were many monks joining for this butter.   

**Q:**  If there was a fight in Deyang, usually the gegö would settle it, right? If the shengo came all of sudden while you were not there, could the shengo settle it in the Deyang?   

**A:**  If the case was reported to the shengo, then he could settle it. The shengo was not allowed to come to Deyang to settle a case unless someone asked him. But if the fight was coincident with the arrival of the shengo, then he could settle it on the spot. The gegö was there and he would settle it.   

**Q:**  Were people allowed to report the shengo directly by not reporting the gegö first?   

**A:**  There were some people doing that and then the shengo would settle it and the gegö did not have any authority. For example, when the shengo goes on patrolling to check the cleanliness and whether the monks were doing prayers. If the matter was serious, the shengo would settle it. When the shengo goes on patrolling, he was not allowed to go into the gegö's courtyard. This was because the gegö was holing the jayig for the jurisdiction. And vice versa, the gegö was not allowed to go to the courtyard where the shengo lives because the shengo was also holding his jayig.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the tsondu when you were gegö?   

**A:**  About 50-60. On the day the tsondu meets it was like all the people in the tsondu were given the right to talk and disagree.   

**Q:**  And how many chöndze and chatsül, [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ] were there ?   

**A:**  There were only 4-5 chöndze among the younger and some among the older ones, so altogether there were about 14-15. Then for the chatsül who weren't in the tsondu there were about 7-8.   

**Q:**  What does the name chatsül mean?   

**A:**  I don't know the meaning.   

**Q:**  Do you spell it [Tib. བྱ] which means "do" or was it [Tib. ཇ] which means tea?   

**A:**  I don't know. Probably, this was a name of person who gives the tonggo.   

**Q:**  What was definition of the chöndze?   

**A:**  I think it means to teach dharma.   

**Q:**  What did you the pechawa do during the chöntsam, [Tib. ཆོས་མཚམས]?   

**A:**  During the chöntsam, we didn't need to go to the tsog and the chöra. Once every 5 nights, the pechawa would go to debate tsenyi and they went when it was almost dark and stayed there very late. The abbot and gegö would come and it was very strictly checked whether all have come or not. Then usually in the morning we study pecha and practice at noon.   

**Q:**  During the chöthog could you go to ask your teacher questions?   

**A:**  Yes. In between there was some time. First there was the morning session, shogchö, [Tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས]. After this ends there was traja. Then after this was finished we went to shag and ate bag and tea. Then at about 1 p.m. there was chöra where we debated tsenyi. We didn't stay there too long. After this chöra was finished, we took out our pecha and went to pecha gegen to ask questions. We would say that in chöra such and such an issue came up and there were some contradictions. I said this and he said that, was it correct or not. There was not just one gidru at one pecha gegen, there were many at this time asking questions to one's gegen. Then after this, there was the ritual, kurim, [Tib. སྐུ་རིམ] in the chöra in late afternoon. First we did some prayers. Then the lagyüba would leave and the pechawa stayed a debated at night. When there was no chöthog, if there was alms in the tsogchen, we would go to get the alms and if there was no alms in tshogchen, we went to the pecha gegen. And the toter gegen would give the food. We studied the pecha for a whole except there was a little break.   

**Q:**  If you wanted to go to Lhasa, could you go?   

**A:**  Yes. During the chöntsham I told my gegen that I want to go to Lhasa. We were free to go. Asking him was a formality. Sometimes the gegen would send me to do something.   

**Q:**  When you were small how did you live--there were three pechawa in shag?   

**A:**  I'm really not sure. We went to the traja we had tsampa to eat and we had enough and we could make the living because we had the alms like one tranka and one sho and the salary. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Did your gegen do any work?   

**A:**  The gegen just lead the gidru and if the gegen was lagyüba he recited the Drgölma, [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] prayer. If the gegen was pechawa, he read the pecha.   

**Q:**  Some lagyüba gegen knew sewing and that stuff, right?   

**A:**  Yes some did.   

**Q:**  Did your gegen do that?   

**A:**  My gegen didn't know sewing and he just went for the circumabbulation around the monastery and recited Drölma. He was a dobdo. Nowadays sometimes I wonder how he had managed with a little alms and salary.   

**Q:**  Those days mostly you eat pag and tea. Did you eat much meat?   

**A:**  We ate a little bit of meat. Mostly we ate thukba bagthug which was said to be as same as eating pag and dish. At that time, we got a lot of meat for 1 tranka. Maybe, it was like one gyama.   

**Q:**  What kind of tea did you drink?   

**A:**  We mostly drank black tea but sometimes gegen made butter tea and we drank it together. We would usually put some grease on top of the black tea.   

**Q:**  Was there a chöndze's endowment, [Tib. ཐེབ་རྩ]?   

**A:**  Some chöndze left endowments for paying salary and the alms to the monks but it was not required. This endowment would be taken in turns by the ngünyer and the chabu.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for reciting prayers in the thsog? Was it for the state or for the monastery or for the monks?   

**A:**  These in the broadest sense, were for the purpose of helping all sentient beings to achieve enlightenment, [Tib. sems can thams cad sangs rgyas kyi go 'pangs thob pa]]. It would help the sentient beings to overcome suffering and achieve happiness.   

**Q:**  Are there different prayers for different reasons?   

**A:**  They were all same. They were to help the sentient beings to achieve enlightenment. There were many kinds of the rituals to perform like the Tara Ritual, Drölchog, [Tib. སྒྲོལ་ཆོག] and the Ritual for the Medicine Buddha, Menla, [Tib. སྨན་བླ] etc. And the sponsors would request for the rituals as they wished. Some sponsors who didn't know about the religion, their purpose of giving traja and alms and asking to perform the Tara Ritual was to help them to have a good fortune in their business and not to have hindrance when they travel, but not much to help all the sentient beings to overcome suffering and have happiness and to achieve enlightenment. [laughter] But the monks who perform the ritual were doing that for all the sentient beings.   

**Q:**  Was there a difference between the prayers in shag and tshog?   

**A:**  No, they were the same in meaning and intent for all the sentient beings to achieve enlightenment. In the tshog we say whatever the umdze starts. But in the shag, some did prayers and meditate on special meditative deities, yidam, [Tib. ཡི་དམ] and there were many different yidam like Vajra Yogini, [Tib. རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ] and Yaman Taka, [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད], Shri Devi, [Tib. ལྷ་མོ] etc.   

**Q:**  Did the umdze have the authority to start whatever prayers he liked? Was there a book for him to know to say such and such prayers were to be recited on such and such dates?   

**A:**  The main thing was whatever the sponsors had written in the request for the prayers, the umdze would start that. But, when the nyertsang gives a traja, however, the umdze could choose the prayer he wants.   

**Q:**  In the tsog, if the young monks didn't behave well, were they allowed to beat them?   

**A:**  When they change the gegö, they would hang some switches behind the door. This was for the gegö to use it. The gegö would pretend to be angry even he was really not and tell the young monks, "aren't you behaving yourself" and he would even hit them a little bit on their nose.   

**Q:**  Did the gegö walk back and forth in the tsog?   

**A:**  In the tshog, the gegö didn't sit. He walks back and forth checking on the discipline. Hitting monks who misbehaved.   

**Q:**  Did the chabril walk back and forth in the tsog? And were they allowed to beat the monks?   

**A:**  In Deyang, the chabril would walk back and forth in the tsog, but had no authority to beat the monks. He would also stand at the end of row, but he was not allowed to hit the monks. If he did, the gegö will scold him a lot. The Gomang chabril had a lot of power, but not the one in Deyang.   

**Q:**  What was the best period of being a monk and what was the worst period before the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  This depends on whether one faced any bad problems or had some good things happened. In general, the best period was the summer retreat, yarney [Tib. དབྱར་གནས] which was held in Drepung from the 16th of the 6th month to the 7th month. During this time, there was no tshog and chöra and all the monks were not allowed to go out. If you were a pechawa, you invited your gegen and would be in retreat which was called Pentsam, [Tib. dpe mtsams]. At that time, we were happy and relaxed. However, we got the highest alms and salary in winter.   

**Q:**  What was the worst time?   

**A:**  If something bad happened, then it was bad, otherwise, it was kind of generic, [Tib. དེ་འདྲ་འདྲ་པོ་ཅིག་རེད].   

**Q:**  Did you live continuously with your first gegen in the same shag?   

**A:**  I did until he died. After my gegen died, I was left alone. I had two gegen; one died here after I took him down here and the one who was lagyüba died in the monastery. Then the two older gidru who were pechawa became gegen and then I also studied pecha. They were very good in pechawa but one died in Lhasa and one died in the shag before they could pass the geshe. After they died, there was an old couple who were miser of Lukhangwa and were living like beggars. They were related to us. They had a daughter who had a son, so I kept their son and made him a monk and kept as my gidru.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was about 30-31 at that time. I was in the same shag from the start.   

**Q:**  Were there any friendships in the monastery as same as we have in the laymen's society like playing mahjong together and gathering together?   

**A:**  In one courtyard everyone wouldn't equally be friendly, right? Two or three of them were friends and others may not be.   

**Q:**  Was it similar with the laymen?   

**A:**  The laymen and the monastery couldn't be the same. In the monastery, there were a lot of monks visiting each other and eating foods and drinking tea. All of the monks were not that rich. So if I'm having butter tea today, I'll ask some friends to come and have some and vice versa. And sometimes, if a friend was making bagtsamargu, [Tib. བག་ཚ་མར་ཁུ], a meal with pieces of dough mixed with dry cheese and melted butter, he would tell his friends to come and have some.   

**Q:**  What was the difference between the laymen and the monks?   

**A:**  In the courtyard where laymen lived they would call each other to drink chang, but we didn't have that in the monastery. In the monastery, if I make a pot of butter tea, I will go to my neighbors carrying the pot and pour them a bowl of tea and then return with the pot.   

**Q:**  In the monastery, did you lend tsamba and money to each other?   

**A:**  In the monastery we lend tsamba and money among ourselves (friends) and it was without interest. Unless it was a very large amount we did not charge interest and they would pay back when they get the alms and the salary in the tshog.   

**Q:**  What did you geshe and monks think about the monk's homosexual custom, drompo, [Tib. mgron pop]. To me it seems it was a violation against the vows?   

**A:**  It was like a thoughtless, but carefree conduct, [Tib. སྣང་བ་སྐྱིད་པོ].   

**Q:**  Did you think this was wrong or right?   

**A:**  It was wrong because the Buddha had made 253 prohibitions for the male gelong, [Tib. དགེ་སློང་ཕ] and 360 prohibitions for the female gelong, [Tib. དགེ་སློང་མ]. This conduct was prohibited in these rules. Last time, I mentioned about four prohibitions for expelling monks. There were five Buddha's prohibitions. If some one violates the four, it was definite that one will be expelled. Among these five prohibitions, the one we are now talking about was done by many dobdo who were showing off to be brave. But they were thoughtless and they have committed a non-virtuous deed, [Tib. ཉེས་པ] because it was not allowed and this violation was called Lhagma, [Tib. ལྷག་མ]. It was also a kind if crime, [Tib. ལྟུང་བ].   

**Q:**  The monks would not do this much, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't the gegö regard this as a law in the monastery and put pressure, [Tib. མནན] on the monks not to do that?   

**A:**  The gegö would not put this pressure and it was kind of ignored, [Tib. སྣང་ཆུང] although it was not allowed and the monks would not get expelled for that.   

**Q:**  In America, I heard from a geshe saying that the Buddha didn't prohibit this kind of homosexual. Buddha said that it was not allowed to have sex with women and have sex in the hole [anus]. So this was not illegal. Do you think so?   

**A:**  It was not like this. It's against the Buddha's 253 gelong's prohibition which he made one by one when such things happened in the past. This was called Lhagma, the violation of masturbating, [Tib. ཁུ་བ་འབྱིན་པའི་ལྷག་མ]. But in the great monastic seats this was not that conspicuous and they didn't specifically say that you were not allowed to do this.   

**Q:**  Do you think it would have been better to have less lagyüba and more pechawa and pay more salary for the pechawa?   

**A:**  No, this couldn't be done because the lagyüba would have objection.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't it be good to have less lagyüba?   

**A:**  In the future, lagyüba will become less and you didn't need to make it less because if the lagyüba didn't stay there sincerely and adhering the vows, [Tib. གཙང་མ] they would become less naturally.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard that there were about 4,000 monks in Gomang just before the revolt and there were only 360 pechawa. So there were too many lagyüba and too few pechawa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Some lagyüba even went to the north to collect offerings, büdü, [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] and when they come, they brought yaks and sold them here and they would hang up the yak meat in their shag.   

**Q:**  Some became farmers and some became traders, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the future, there won't be such things and it will be clean. [laughter]   

