# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0002.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Tharchin [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་མཐར་ཕྱིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee is a senior monk from Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he describes the various hierarchical positions within the monastery and the process for promotion within these positions, including exams and payments.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0002_04/M_0002_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  If a pechawa finished khatog grammar, düdring and düchen and then reached tagrik and if he was unable to supply the tonggo to avoid shöndre but continued on studying pecha eventually did he have to give the money to buy out the shöndre?   

**A:**  If a pechawa continued on without supplying the tonggo to avoid the shöndre and got promoted in the grades and reach the level of being ready to do his geshe tonggo, then there would be a discussion about this earlier omission and they would ask you to buy out, lucha, [Tib. བླུ་བྱ] the shöndre. It won't be too big.   

**Q:**  Then did he have to do the gegö?   

**A:**  He won't have to do the gegö. After paying the shöndre lucha, he would give the geshe tonggo. Only those who gave the tonggo for the shöndre had to do the gegö. He would now be way up in the grade system, so he didn't have to give the tonggo and the reason he got this far was that he was a pechawa. There were several kinds of geshe. The highest was lharampa, the 2nd was tsogramba, [Tib. ཚོགས་རམས་པ] the 3rd was lingse, [Tib. གླིང་བསྲེ] and 4th was dorampa, [Tib. མདོ་རམས་པ]. Lingse and dorampa were about the same. The abbot usually did examination of the candidates who were at each geshe level. The abbot would distinguish between those who would do lharampa and tsogrampa. Everyone couldn't go for this at once. So each year, if there were 10 who were of lharampa quality, the abbot would draw lots to see who were the 2 or 3 or so who would be able to actually do it in this year. Similarly the tsogrampa would also be chosen through drawing lots. There was no way of backing, [Tib. འགོ་འདྲེན] to get this since all the people can evaluate ones level of knowledge themselves.   

**Q:**  After one gave the geshe tonggo, were they allowed to go in the tsondu?   

**A:**  Not right away. Unless they did the gegö, they couldn't get into the tsondu. Some who had given geshe tonggo had to wait for a quite a long time to become the gegö. Some who were good in pecha became geshe first and then became the gegö. Some gave the tonggo to buy out shöndre early and became gegö before becoming the geshe.   

**Q:**  Anyway, if the lharampa had paid the shöndre lucha, he didn't have to be the gegö?   

**A:**  Since he had given the tonggo to buy out shöndre, he would be among the line to be the gegö sooner or later. But if a geshe paid the shöndre lucha, then he didn't need to be the gegö.   

**Q:**  How much was the lucha? Was there a difference in the amount of money between the shöndre lucha and the tonggo to buy out the shöndre?   

**A:**  The shöndre lucha depends on what the abbot says to give and you don't need to serve the traja and money wasn't that much.   

**Q:**  When you were small, your father gave the tonggo to buy out the shöndre, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I became the gegö in summer when I was 37 years old and I also became the geshe in the winter of the same year. I had to be the gegö first because I had given the tonggo to buy out the shöndre.   

**Q:**  For lagyüba, if they hadn't given the tonggo to buy out the shöndre, they didn't become the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They stayed in the düchen and didn't go to the higher grades like tagrik. If they supplied the tonggo to buy out shöndre then they got promoted in the grades like tagrik and were in the line up for the gegö where there were both the pechawa and lagyüba. Even if one was a small monk, if he gave the tonggo to buy out the shöndre, he would reach the tagrik at once and he would be in the line to become the gegö.   

**Q:**  But in the chöra, did they get promoted in the grades?   

**A:**  They would be promoted in grades even if he was a lagyüba, but then slowly get promoted to the grades like uma etc. The pechawa would get promoted in groups to the higher grades to be in the line for becoming geshe.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, did the pechawa have to stay in the tagrik for 2-3 years?   

**A:**  If the former one was getting promoted, then the latter would follow him up.   

**Q:**  Was there a limit time for them to get promoted?   

**A:**  No. In the highest grade dzö, [Tib. མཛོད], if there were about 11-12-15 monks, the abbot would give an exam [Tib.རྒྱུགས་ལེན] once a year in the chöra. And the abbot would divide the grade into 3 categories: lharampa, tsogrampa, dorampa and lingse. Then the abbot would draw lottery and would say this year you 2 go for lharamba, next year you two etc. He would do this for each of these grades of monks in the dzö. When the dzö grade was almost finished, then they would promote the grades below into dzö.   

**Q:**  Were they allowed to have 3 lharampa and the 3 tsogrampa in one year?   

**A:**  Yes, there were like 2 lharampa and 2-3 tsogrampa, but since in the small tratsang, this would happen just a few times. In Deyang, in one year at the most, there would be 3 lharampa and 2 tsogramba. In the larger tratsang, there would be 4-5 lharampa a year.   

**Q:**  They remained in the dzö for 2-3 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes because this was the highest grade and they had to remain there till they pass the geshe.   

**Q:**  The lagyüba would not get promoted in those grades?   

**A:**  After that, when some lagyüba became the gegö, then they would promote some lagyüba in the grades.   

**Q:**  Did they reach dzö?   

**A:**  Yes, they did, but they didn't need to learn the pecha.   

**Q:**  So they couldn't become lharampa and tsogrampa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, dzö and uma were names of the pecha.   

**Q:**  I heard in Gomang, the lagyüba did prayers in chöra and then left before the pechawa came and debated tsenyi.   

**A:**  In Gomang, there were some who had a good voice called kesang, [Tib. སྐད་བཟང]. And there were some pechawa joining the kesang and after that, the pechawa stayed there debating tsenyi and the kesang left the chöra. In Deyang, we had a few sungsang, [Tib.གསུང་བཟང] who were specialists in prayers, but there were not many people. They were lagyüba but they had the same special privilege as pechawa in not having to do shöndre. But, if there were 5 lagyüba and 5 pechawa and if there was some work to be done in the tratsang, then the lagyüba had to do it and if there was a sungsang among the lagyüba, he did not have to do the work.   

**Q:**  Did lagyüba have to go to the tsog and chöra when they reached dzö?   

**A:**  They had to go unless they had done gegö, but the gegö didn't push them much if they didn't go. If the pechawa didn't go, we scolded them as it's not okay.   

**Q:**  What about the dobdo?   

**A:**  The dobdo mostly didn't come. They had to remain in the düchen and mostly just wandered around without going to tsog or chöra and they had some special privileges.   

**Q:**  At the time of the gyugchen, the final exam did lagyüba and pechawa have to come?   

**A:**  Yes, all of them would go through the motions of taking the exam. The lagyüba didn't have much to take the test. But 3-4 lagyüba take the test together. If one was better at doing daily prayers, khandön [Tib. ཁ་འདོན] like the eight kind of prayers called, Monlam Namgye, [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་རྣམ་བརྒྱད] then he started the prayers and the others just made some noises and it was okay.   

**Q:**  The monastic officials, lene, [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] didn't go, right??   

**A:**  Yes. Chöndze, chatsü, and others with special privilege such as gegö, nyertsang, chabu and all who had the thön like the ex-gegö did not have to take the test.   

**Q:**  Did the geshe have to take the test?   

**A:**  After they have passed the geshe, they didn't have to come even though they had not yet done the gegö. At that time, they would take the real exam for the pechawa in very detailed and thoroughly involving the main texts, [Tib. རྩ་བ] of five tsenyi texts, shung kabönga. [Tib. gzhung bka' spod lnag]. Even the small child monks, inchung, [Tib. ཨིན་ཆུང] who had a good memory would be asked to take the test on the prayers called Chöjö Rabsel which is the prayer recited to the general assembly. Except the geshe and the tratsang nene who had the special privileges, all of the monks had to take the test.   

**Q:**  The Gomang had a trouble saying that the pechawa were difficult and the Dalai Lama gave them 3,000-4,000-5,000 dotse. Did something similar happen in Deyang?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did the pechawa in Deyang have kind of special privilege?   

**A:**  No. We didn't have any additional money or salary for the pechawa and nobody claimed for that.   

**Q:**  In the tsondu, how did people sit and what did they eat, etc.?   

**A:**  Tsondu's seating arrangement is: The abbot had a high throne. Under that the gegö and the umdze sat on a little higher cushion. Under that on one side, the ex-geg would sit. On the other side the 4 chabu and two nyertsang would sit. Under that, the ex-chabu, thönsin, [Tib. ཐོན་ཟིན] would sit. In the middle row, the ex-nyertsang would sit. The ex-chatsü or the ex-nyertsang had already become the nyertsang and although they were to become the candidates, but they didn't get the shengo and became the ex-nyertsang and they still remain the tsondu. Abbot gegö umdze nyertsang nyertsang ex-gegö ex-nyertsang chabu ex-gegö ex-nyertsang chabu ex-gegö ex-nyertsang chabu ex-gegö ex-nyertsang chabu   

**Q:**  Under this where would the ex-chabu sit?   

**A:**  They sat under the 4 incumbent chabu.   

**Q:**  What kind of food did they serve in the tsondu?   

**A:**  There was not much food and in the beginning they serve tea. Then they put tsamba bags there, so we could eat as much as we wanted. In the evening there is a meal called Sötsig Chemo [Tib. གསོལ་ཚིགས་ཆེན་མོ] where they serve boiled mutton, radish and pag.   

**Q:**  Was the tsondu all day long?   

**A:**  Yes. But if the work was over we end the tsondu.   

**Q:**  You had experienced the tsondu twice when you became the gegö. What did they mainly talk about at the tsondu?   

**A:**  First there was the change in the gegö. The ex-gegö at first would be waiting outside. This was because the tsondu discusses the work of the gegö over the past six months. If it concludes he did well we give a khata ashe [Tib. ཨ་ཤེ] and if not we give a middle or inferior khata. When this was settled then the gegö was invited to the tsondu and the khata was put on him while he stands and bent over. Otherwise, the things were not said in words. Then he was now ex-gegö and takes his place at the end of the line of ex-gegö. Then the tsog for the traja would be held and the new gegö would come in. The jayig was in the room where the meeting was held as the ex-gegö has given it to them before hand.   

**A:**  Was the jayig hung on the pillar?   

**A:**  It was put there in the tsondu hall on that day. But regularly it was handed over to the gegö and was hung on the beam. At the same time, the traja was ready below the meeting hall and the first tea was served. Then the umdze did a prayer for tea, chamchö, [Tib. ཇ་མཆོད], the tea was served and the monks ate pag. They ate the pag silently. At this time, the tratsang's 4 chabu brought the 13th Dalai Lama's jayig to the dukhang where the new gegö was waiting. The chabu gave him the jayig. Then the new gegö read the jayig on the tsog while the monks were eating pag and then all the authority was with the new gegö.   

**Q:**  Would they discuss the things other than regarding the gegö?   

**A:**  Then the tsondu did an accounting with the old gegö and the umdze about money and khata they have received as gifts over the past 6 months when someone dies. There was the custom where they pay some money for asking to do prayers, kyabten, [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྟེན] and a khata along with the kyabten and ask the gegö to read a note that so and so has died and we did the prayers for him and the gegö reads it in the tsog. After the traja, the gegö and umdze would put these in a box and lock the box. This was kept by the chabu and he gives a (receipt). Then after 6 months we did the accounting of this. Then it was also decided where to give the money. At this time, they also decide where to put the new endowment given by the sponsor and to whom the money should be handed like the tsondu or the ngünyer etc.   

**Q:**  You said the money goes to two persons; one is the chabu and one is the nyertsang, right?   

**A:**  The money was spend by the chabu and the nyertsang and if the expenditure and the money they had becomes unbalanced, then the money would be supplemented by the tsondu gyendzom which was called Tsogteng, [Tib. ཚོགས་སྟེང] and they would divide the money to them. Usually, our tratsang always becomes unbalanced on the expenditure and the income.   

**Q:**  Deyang Tratsang had a good grain salary, druphog, [Tib. འབྲུ་ཕོགས], right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was very good. The other tratsang would feel amazed about our grain salary because we had 6 khe of barley.   

**Q:**  What about other things happened like disputes etc?   

**A:**  This didn't really happen much. Most were settled without having to come to the tsondu. Most things that weren't too serious were settled by the gegö. Larger ones were settled by the abbot. In case, something was reported to the tsondu, the tsondu had the authority to settle it.   

**Q:**  Can you give an example of the something that reached the tsondu?   

**A:**  Deyang Tratsang had a shiga called Ley [Tib. སླེ] Shiga that was held on lease by Thamba Simkhang, [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང] who was our close sponsor. The oracle called Thamba Shango, [Tib. zhang go ?] was from that family. So the tratsang didn't dare to say anything to them. They gave 1 khe of grain for each monk in Deyang as the lease and they have to give a little bit grain to the tratsang. It was said that the shiga had good fields and the common monks heard about this and said that they wanted the shiga back and thought 1 khe per monk was too little. But the tsondu was afraid to say anything to Thamba Simkhang since they were tratsang's main sponsor. After a while, there was some trouble, but the tsondu gyendzom could not make decisions. So the common monks convened a meeting of their own about this. At that time, I was also among the common monks. The common monks said that Deyang should take back the shiga and manage it by the tratsang. We can't leave it with one family. We were losing a lot.   

**Q:**  Where did they common monks hold the meeting?   

**A:**  The common monks met in the chöra.   

**Q:**  Who called the meeting?   

**A:**  The common monks themselves told one another to come at such and such time. They also rested their hope on some capable monks and then the common monks became strong and they could take back the shiga. The common monks went to the tsondu and held the meeting together and the common monks selected and appointed the new shidü and also appointed the people to hand over the shiga.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  This was just before the revolt.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu settle the matter?   

**A:**  No. They couldn't.   

**Q:**  If the matter was not very serious, the abbot would settle it, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that you saved up the big issues to bring up to the tsondu that was held each 6 months and settle them at once.   

**A:**  Probably not. Usually, when the tsondu needs to appoint the new chabu and nyertsang, they were appointed by the tsondu. There were two people who were named nyertsang, but actually there were 5-6 people running the nyertsang. Those under the nyertsang such as jama, shidü and nangnyer were appointed by the tsondu. Some of them these nyertsang stayed in the tratsang and work as jama and some went as shidü to the shiga.   

**Q:**  Can you give an example of what Jaglang Bugpai Theb [Tib. ལྕགས་གླང་སྦུག་པའི་དེབ] is?   

**A:**  It's a big book about the size of the big dictionary here. E.G. It was written like the head line, Barchö Chöra, [Tib. དབར་ཆོས་ཆོས་ར]which was held between Mönlam and Tsongchö, [Tib. ཙོགས་མཆོད] and below this it was written, on such and such day, so and so sponsor would give the traja etc. It lists all those for the 15 days of the barchö chöra in order. On the 30th of the 2nd Tibetan month, the procession called Tsongchö Serbang, [Tib. ཙོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྦྲེང] is held. And there were monthly chöra, [Tib. ཟླ་ཆོས] from the 3rd of the 3rd Tibetan month to the 3rd of the 4th Tibetan month. This had the head line, Jichö Chenmo, [Tib. དཔྱིད་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] which was written in the book.   

**Q:**  Did they write in this book about the tonggo that the nyertsang gives from the income they get from the shiga?   

**A:**  The tonggo that the nyertsang gave were not listed in the Jaglang Bugpai Theb. In the Jaglang Bugpai Theb, they list only the salary endowments left by the sponsors. If a sponsor leaves other endowment like 1,000 dotse, this would go to one of the ngünyer and the next sponsor's endowment would go to the next ngünyer.   

**Q:**  Where was the book that listed all the nyertsang's traja and salary? If you had to look at it where was it?   

**A:**  They had their own book and they would check it. There was no way to cheat. The nyertsang and chabu also have some endowment. The salary or tea was given by the office who had received the endowment and the gegö would be given a slip of paper on the night before saying that the salary endowment given by such and such sponsors was going to be given on the next day and the gegö would read it in the tsog. Then they check whether the slip and the book matches or not.   

**Q:**  Did the gegö check like the nyertsang's big salary paid on the Ganden Ngamjö.   

**A:**  The gegö did not need to check this because this is a very big payment. These became kind of regular and everyone knows what they have to give. But the gegö would check whether the nyertsang gave the salary properly or not and if not they would tell them.   

**Q:**  Tell me some about the traja and begging for firewood shinglong, [Tib. ཤིང་སློང] during the chöthog?   

**A:**  When they held the chöthog for a month, they would send the monks for the shinglong for 4 days. During this, there is no traja and chöra. Otherwise, there was one traja every day.   

**Q:**  If there was no sponsor, did the nyertsang have to give the traja?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was this written in the Jaglang Book?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  What was the rule about keeping gidru? If a pechawa keeps a gidru, was he allowed to keep the gidru before he becomes a geshe?   

**A:**  If the pechawa was good in pecha, there were many people requesting him to keep the gidru, there was no rule. You can have as many gidru as you want.   

**Q:**  This was the pechai gegen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the food giving gegen, toter, [Tib. ལྟོ་སྟེར] gegen?   

**A:**  They just kept them in the shag and shared their livelihood and give him the food and teach pecha.   

**Q:**  Even if you didn't give the tonggo to buy out the shöndre, were you allowed to keep the gidru?   

**A:**  If the gegen's condition was quite good then after some time the gegen would give the tonggo to buy out the shöndre. And if his parent's condition was good, they would give the tonggo to buy out the shöndre. It was up to your choice to keep the gidru whether you were pechawa or lagyüba.   

**Q:**  What about gegö's traja? One traja was given in the 6th month and one in 11th month; this seems to be the gegö of winter. When did the gegö of summer give the traja?   

**A:**  The one who gave the traja on the 14th of the 6th month was the gegö of summer gathering, [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས]. Then the gegö of summer also gave a traja on the 15th of 6th.   

