# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0229.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Jama Ngagdrug [Tib. ཇ་མ་ངག་ཕྲུག]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** August 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** T. N. Shelling  
**Name:** Jama Ngagdrug [Tib. ཇ་མ་ངག་ཕྲུག]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jama Ngagdrug [Tib. ཇ་མ་ངག་ཕྲུག] was a monk and trader from Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ] Monastery in Kham. He was one of the tsondzin leaders in Chushigandru and was with Gombo Tashi [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] when he went to get the government's guns from Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] Monastery in 1958. In this interview, he discusses the expedition, in detail, and the subsequent fighting when they unsuccessfully tried to return to Lhoka and their subsequent flight to Pembar.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0229_02/H_0229_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  At that time that the main regiment which was led by Andru Jinda (Gombo Tashi) confronted the Chinese, what were you thinking? What did you think would happen after the fight?   

**A:**  At that time, we planned to fight with the Chinese and leave. We didn't plan to stay there and hold the place. We were just blocking the way of the Chinese.   

**Q:**  When you confronted the Chinese all of a sudden, what did you think?   

**A:**  I didn't have many thoughts. It was a wide place where we fought. Therefore, it seemed that neither could we cause severe damage against the Chinese nor could the Chinese cause severe damage against us. When we got to the top of the Karkhang mountain pass, Andru Jinda told me to stay on that mountain pass. He told me to blow the trumpet and tell the soldiers on the other side of the stream to withdraw. He said that he was going with the main troops to Sinde Nara and they are going to stay there tonight and relax.   

**Q:**  Did Andru Jinda go ahead?   

**A:**  Yes, Litang Simgag was killed in Karkhang and several others of them were wounded.   

**Q:**  Was he a Simgag, a bodyguard of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  No, he was just called Simgag. When we got to Sinde Nara, it was almost dark. We could see the fires made by the Chushigandru soldiers who had camped there.   

**Q:**  Was that the main troop led by Andru Jinda?   

**A:**  Yes. We could see them making fires and boiling tea. At that time, they asked the oracle to go into trance and asked for a prophecy as to whether it would be better to go tonight or stay. At that point, the Chinese had already blocked the way at the lower part of the valley.   

**Q:**  Was that Shungden?   

**A:**  Yes. The prophecy said "You should get many volunteers to come out [to fight], and you should leave tonight. You shouldn't stay here."   

**Q:**  The oracle [medium] was a person in Chushigandru, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was called Aba Yalo. At that time, I went to the front as a volunteer. We could see the Chinese trucks driving along in Sinde Nara. After that, the volunteers got scattered or withdrew and actually, there were just a few people going to fight. Then the Chinese fired some guns from the rear and then we went to Sinde Nara. At that time, the Chinese trucks were driving along the plains with their lights turned off. They were afraid of getting shot at if they turned on their lights. Then we exchanged fire and destroyed three trucks.   

**Q:**  At that moment, did you fire rifles or machine guns?   

**A:**  We fired rifles only. We couldn't kill the Chinese who were in the trucks. After the trucks were attacked, the Chinese ran away at night. They had left their blankets in the trucks. We just killed several Chinese soldiers. We didn't kill many of them. On that night, we slept in the lower part of Sinde Nara because we couldn't see the way and the main troop had left Sinde Nara at that time. After that, we went to Lake Namtso [Tib. གནམ་མཚོ] in the north.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you cross the Karkhang Mountain Pass, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  All of the troops went to Namtso, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On our way to Namtso, we arrived at Woyug Zomthang [Tib. འོད་ཡུག་འཛོམས་ཐང] where we attacked 6 Chinese trucks who had come from India and were going to Lhasa via Shigatse. We destroyed the 6 trucks on the highway under Woyug Zomthang.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you kill many soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes, we killed many Chinese soldiers and we could see the blood on the trucks.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me the number of the Chinese who were killed in that fighting?   

**A:**  I can't tell you the exact number. We were not trained, so nobody counted the number of people who were killed.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese shoot at you?   

**A:**  Yes, we exchanged fire. Actually, all of the Chinese in the trucks were killed.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese kill your people?   

**A:**  No, but some of us were wounded. After that, we arrived at Dam Jogtsela [Tib. འདམ་ལྕོག་ཙེ་ལ]. That was the place where people were going back and forth from Nagchu to Lhasa. In that place, we saw there were two army trucks coming from Lhasa. There weren't many Chinese in the trucks. We set the trucks on fire.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there anything in the trucks?   

**A:**  There were just some bedding. At that time, the driver had been shot in his head and his brain had splashed on the door of the truck. After that, we saw there were three trucks coming from Nagchu from the back side of Dam Jogtsela mountain pass. We destroyed these trucks also. It was quite difficult to shoot them because the Chinese were hiding between the tires and shooting back. The Chinese were well trained. They were also lying in the ditches dug along the highway for taking water for the vehicles. One day, there were about 100 Chinese cavalry coming behind us so we left a group of soldiers to fight with the Chinese cavalry and the main troop went ahead. When the Chinese knew that we were waiting for them, they didn't come up and went back. After that, we arrived at the place from where we could see Drigung Yangrigang [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་ཡང་རི་སྒང] Monastery and we sent the advanced troops ahead. When we drank tea and we were about to leave, we heard the gunshots of our advanced troops.   

**Q:**  Which of the groups was the advanced troop on that day?   

**A:**  On that day, we sent soldiers from different groups and my brother was also among them. In that place, there were forests on both sides and there were also high rocky mountains. There were only several Chinese soldiers left, most of them were killed in the fighting. After that, we got on the mountain pass and there were two nomad households. We boiled tea in that place. The nomads said, "You shouldn't go down along this place. The Chinese had been digging trenches for a week in this place and there isn't any place on both sides of the mountain where there were no Chinese. The whole area was filled with Chinese." At that time, while we had stopped there for boiling tea, Andru Jinda called for a meeting, but I didn't attend the meeting.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you attend the meeting? What did you think?   

**A:**  I just stayed there boiling tea. I thought that the meeting won't be good because the Chinese were well prepared. Therefore, we will suffer losses and we can not get any benefits. I sent my helper Paldor to attend the meeting. After a while Paldor came back and said that they asked the oracle to go into trance and the deity gave the prophecy that, "Volunteers should come out and you should go to the place where the Chinese are waiting." So, it was decided to go. Then I drank tea and ate food. I was among the advanced troop. At that moment, Andru Jinda was also boiling tea and he asked me, "Are you going with the advanced troop." I said "Yes, but today I don't plan to come back." He told me that I have to go down. Then I told Jinda "You should be able to take care of the main troop. I am going there while watching [what would happen to] the main troop." At that time, I told the advanced troops "Today, let us not ride horses, because the Chinese have been waiting there. Let's walk along. While we were going ahead some of the advanced troops were lying down. I asked them "What happened?" They said that the place was full of Chinese and there isn't any way to go ahead. At that time, amid the bushes of alpine willow trees, Ganzi Pema Yeshe and Targye Gomba's Paldor were there. I asked them where were the Chinese? They said, "The Chinese are coming down slowly from the mountains." At that time, Andru Jinda and the main troop were sitting on a plain saying that they are holding a meeting. Right after that, the Chinese started firing cannons with a sound "Dang." They fired so many shells of cannons that we couldn't hear the sounds of gunshots. They fired so many cannon shells and machine guns that we couldn't see the main troops in the smoke and dust. Then I rode my horse and went to the other side of the stream.   

**Q:**  At that moment, the Chinese were firing cannons against the main troop and also the advanced troop, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The place was full of Chinese. It was like watching a movie when our advanced troops were going ahead and when the horses got hit with the bullets, they raised their tails and fell down. At that time, my servant got hit with the cannon shell and the bleeding from his mouth had become a kind of dry lump of blood. Then I tried to go to get his gun but another person told me, "Don't go to get the gun. If you take this gun, I swear by the Buddha's statue in Jokhang that you will be hit by bullets." At that time, I saw my brother's horse was also killed. So I was telling people that my brother might have been killed also. They said "It is too bad." When I went up, I saw my brother was bending down.   

**Q:**  He wasn't killed, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then some people told me that my brother is wounded. I said "No, problem, I will take care of him." I saw that a piece of his skull was broken off from his head. Then I let him ride my horse. After that, my helper Aka came along and told me to ride his horse saying he is better able to walk. At that time, the Chinese were still firing cannons and Bren-guns and rifles.   

**Q:**  Even though they were shooting so severely, you weren't hit by the bullets, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Not a single bullet hit me or my horse. Then I saw a mule up there loaded with food, so I caught the mule and let Aka ride the mule. At that time, we couldn't get through that place because it was full of Chinese. The Chinese fired machine guns against us. I am not lying. It felt like the wind was blowing. Then Aka said, "Probably, it would be difficult to get through." I said "No problem." "From where should we go?" he said. I told him "This is the only way to go out." He said, "I will never leave your wounded brother, you can feel at ease." At that moment, the mule was frightened and it didn't go forward at all. Then I left the mule there and we were going while shooting at the Chinese and at the end we could cross the mountain pass.   

**Q:**  What happened to Andru Jinda during that time?   

**A:**  Jinda was going along the valley down there. Then I saw a bluish horse and caught it. I met a soldier and he said that he had a rope for tying the horse when grazing. I told him to give me the rope, but the horses was already exhausted so it didn't make any move. When I arrived at the lower part of the valley, there were 3-4 of my servants who had brought horses and they were waiting for me. At that time, I had many servants. Then my brother told me that he wants to take a rest if I agree. I told him that I agree to take a rest.   

**Q:**  Was your brother badly wounded?   

**A:**  Yes, at that moment, I told them to try to find some water for the wounded and they brought some water. Aka said that he found a piece of a cigarette of which the ashes would be very good to stop bleeding.   

**Q:**  Did the tobacco ashes help stop bleeding?   

**A:**  The ashes of cigarettes help people who have lost a lot of blood. At that moment, Andru Jinda also came along that place. He could only speak a little bit.   

**Q:**  He was wounded, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he asked me how is my brother? I told him, "He is alright." Then Jinda said "Tonight we will stay up there and relax."   

**Q:**  At that time, were the Chinese still firing cannons?   

**A:**  At that time, they were not firing cannons, but they were still firing rifles at night. Then my helper said that we should better leave now otherwise, we won't be able to get through after daybreak.   

**Q:**  When you saw that Andru Jinda was wounded, what did you think?   

**A:**  I didn't have any thoughts.   

**Q:**  Didn't you think now it is finished?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  Andru Jinda was the main Commander. When he got wounded, didn't you think that it was too bad?   

**A:**  No, I didn't think like that. I thought today there were many casualties. At that point, there were just a few horses and mules left. Many horses and mules were killed, but the Chinese didn't kill many people. Then I told some of the soldiers to go steal a pole from a tent to use for fuel to boil tea. I said we should boil some tea for the wounded. At that time, Tashi Tseden [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་བརྟན] had some dried cheese mixed with butter and he told me to give it to my wounded brother. Other than that, I didn't have anything to eat. I had only 3 mules left. All the other horses and mules were killed. Then the day broke. At that time we didn't have any bandages for the wounded. I gave some medicines that contained gold and precious stones called Rinchen pills [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་རིལ་བུ] to the wounded. After that, we crossed the mountain pass and went to Mashung [Tib. སྨར་གཞུང]. In that place, I asked whether anyone knew how to bandage the wound. Deyong Aka's servant who was from Shigatse and who had put a red tassel on his braid, said he knew how to bandage the wound. So he just used a white cloth for the bandage. At that moment, I could see through his broken skull that my brother's brain was moving.   

**Q:**  So, your brother was at the point of death, right?   

**A:**  He was wounded like this. Then he mixed tsamba in melted butter and put it in my brother's wound and then wrapped it with the bandage. At that time he said, "Maybe he will die, but this is the only thing to do. If he doesn't die the tsamba will come out from the wound."   

**Q:**  Was the tsamba mixed with melted butter good for the wound?   

**A:**  Yes, it was good. At that time, nobody had anything to eat so some of us went hunting and some people went to the nomad's area to dig sweet potatoes. At that moment, my brother said that he had a pain on the right side of the body. When we looked at it, we saw that he had been shot by 45 bullets of a Bren-gun and not a single bullet had hit him. Actually, he was wounded with cannon shrapnel.   

**Q:**  How did you know that he was shot?   

**A:**  There were blisters where the bullets were shot. He said that he had pain not at the place where he was shot, but on the other side of his body. Right after that, I heard some gunshots "ka ka." I asked them what happened there? They are shooting. They said that might be the hunters shooting. I told them there were more gunshots than that of the hunters. Right after that, they fired cannons. The Chinese had arrived in that place. At that time, we had to go up and cross a mountain pass right at the place where the Chinese were waiting for us. So we were unable to get through that place. So I brought my wounded brother and came back. At that time, Andru Jinda was there holding a mule. He said, "Weren't you able to go up?" I said, "We can't get through this place. We better go back." Then we went along the place down there that was a rocky mountain area. I thought the horses couldn't get through that. If the horses can't get through, I had three wounded soldiers to take with me so I thought today we have to die. [However], after that, the horses could get through the rocky mountain.   

**Q:**  When you were going up the rocky mountain, did the Chinese still fire cannons?   

**A:**  Yes, they were firing cannons and guns. In that place several of our soldiers were killed such as the nephew of Baba Yeshe. Most of our soldiers could not get through that place.   

**Q:**  At that moment, was Andru Jinda with you?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, how serious was Jinda was wounded?   

**A:**  Andru became impaired in speech, but I didn't actually know where he was wounded.   

**Q:**  Was his face still bleeding?   

**A:**  No, he had wiped off the blood. Then we stayed overnight in a valley on the other side.   

**Q:**  There weren't Chinese in that place, right?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there were no Chinese. But just before daybreak I saw that there were some people going towards our main troops. They were the soldiers of Chushigandru. I asked them why they were going there. They said, "We might have to leave. They were saddling their horses." Then I told them that we should saddle our horses because we had many wounded to take with us. At that time, Litang Ragrag had been wounded. He was wounded when he was with Andru Jinda. Ragrag was resting in that place and we also took a rest. Right after that, the Chinese fired their cannons so I said, "We had better leave. Otherwise, if they fire cannons at the mountain pass we will have a hard time." On that day, the toughest soldiers were left behind to fight and the soldiers who brought the wounded went ahead. On that day, we were unable to get through that place, because the Chinese blocked us. When we crossed the mountain and went down we arrived at Ata Tshokha [Tib. ? mtsho kha] Lake and then when we went further we arrived Gyashö Benkar [Tib. རྒྱ་ཤོད་བན་དཀར] and then next we arrived at Chang Miti [Tib. བྱང་རྨི་ཏི] and stayed in that place.   

**Q:**  When you saw Andru Jinda was wounded and it was because Shungden told you go to go down, what did you think?   

**A:**  I didn't pay attention to [Tib. དོ་སྣང] Shungden. When we were taking a rest for the day, I went to the tent of Andru Jinda. I was sitting here and Jinda was lying down in a corner and there was a person near the door. Jinda asked me, "How is your brother." I said "He is alright." He said "How are the other wounded." "They are also alright" I said. Then I asked Jinda where are we going tomorrow? At that time, we had arrived at the place where three roads intersected. He said, "Hold on, we are going to ask the oracle to go into trance." Then Kharchen Chöndze [Tib. མཁར་ཆེན] and Kelsang Chunden [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཆོས་ལྡན] put a cushion near the pole of the tent for the oracle to sit and they offered a cup of tea on a stone. Then the oracle came in and he went into trance. I was just watching the oracle. Then they recited the prayer and then they tied the neck of the oracle with a Khata (ceremonial scarf). Then the oracle said, "Ha ha" and he was yelling and jumping upwards. At that point, Kharchen Chöndze, the two of them told the deity, "Which way would be favorable for us to go tomorrow?" In the beginning, the deity was just scolding them and said, "Aren't you going to behave yourselves?" [Tib. སྡུག་ཚོད་ཟིན་གྱི་མིན་པས]. Then they told the deity, "Now we will behave ourselves and we will do whatever you tell us to do." Then they asked the deity, "From where shall we go tomorrow?" Then the deity spoke Chinese and said, "It is not okay." [Ch. bu xing bu xing]. Then the deity lost his trance. At that moment, I was very suspicious about the deity. Before that, I had not been suspicious of the deity.   

**Q:**  Actually, the deity would never speak Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when the deity spoke Chinese, I thought that it is definitely not good. And the direction we should go was not decided. Then I went to the presence of my brother.   

**Q:**  At that moment what did Andru Jinda say?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything. He was just lying down there. Andru Jinda was not that kind of person who will say something right away. Then I went up and stayed with my wounded brother and Paldor. My brother asked me where I have been? I told them I went to see Andru Jinda. He asked me, "Where shall we go?" I said "They asked the oracle to go into trance and asked for a prophecy, but the deity didn't say anything to decide where we should go. The deity spoke Chinese. So I swear by the Three Jewels that the oracle was possessed with a Chinese ghost. He didn't go into trance with the deity. It is not good." Then Paldor told me, "Don't say that. You are going crazy. This is the real Gyalchen Shungden. If you say that, the deity will strangle your neck and kill you."   

**Q:**  Where is Paldor from?   

**A:**  We are from the same place.   

**Q:**  Was he the magji of Targye Gomba?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Then we had to go to the area of Mitikha.   

**Q:**  Did Andru Jinda decide to go to Mitikha?   

**A:**  Yes. When we went through that place we could only go from this side of the place because we couldn't get through from the other side. At that moment, Andru Jinda left about 130-40 riders behind and told them to wait for the Chinese while the main troop will go ahead. So Andru Jinda and the wounded people went ahead on the other side to Mitikha while we were staying on this side. Then we heard that the Chinese soldiers are coming.   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  Some of our soldiers who went to the nomad's place to get food said that.   

**Q:**  Did the nomads tell them about that?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, Andru Jinda came out from his tent wearing a gown and said that except for the wounded, "All of the soldiers have to go. This is the place where we should die. We have to make up our mind and die today." Then we went to the top of the mountain pass. At that time, the Chinese didn't see that Chushigandru was waiting for them. There were about 200 Chinese and they were approaching that place. By then, we shot them and killed most of the Chinese. The remaining Chinese went to hide amidst the rocky mountains. This was the most lucky day since the Chushigandru was founded. At that time, we fired cannons amidst the rocky mountains.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese Lobsang Tashi fire the cannon [for you]?   

**A:**  Yes. When he fired the cannon amidst the rocky mountains he destroyed all the Chinese. After destroying the Chinese, we didn't stay there for the night and left that place.   

**Q:**  In that battle, did you kill many Chinese?   

**A:**  We annihilated [Tib. རྩ་མེད] all 200 of the Chinese soldiers. Since then, the Chinese stopped chasing us from behind.   

**Q:**  Did you kill all of the 200 Chinese, or were some of them were wounded and some of them ran away?   

**A:**  Some of them might have run away. But most of them were killed.   

**Q:**  Were they killed by the cannon shells?   

**A:**  We fired cannon shells and also rifles and killed them.   

**Q:**  How many of your people were killed in that battle?   

**A:**  Not a single person was killed. On that day, we were very lucky because we ambushed the Chinese and they didn't see us.   

**Q:**  Was that Mitikha where you fought the battle?   

**A:**  It was in the place before we arrived at Mitikha. Then I rode my horse and went to find some food. At that time, I saw a rider was going there. Later, I knew that rider was Gyado Thöndrub. There was a very big household in that place who gave Gyado Thöndrub plenty of barley, dry cheese and butter. Gyado Thöndrub told me to stay with him in that place. He said when our soldiers would come, we have to pay them the cost of the food. We shouldn't take those foodstuffs. Then we paid 100 sang for a load of barley. I took a load of barley and some dried cheese and went to the place where the main troop was staying. I told them to boil some barley for dinner and tomorrow we might find a place to grind the barley into tsamba. On the next morning when I was saddling my horse, I felt giddy and I couldn't saddle my horse. So I told my servant to saddle my horse and told them I am not feeling well. My servants said, "What happened to you?" I told them that I feel giddy. At that time, Andru Jinda and those people were staying in a big yak hair tent and I also stayed there. Then I knew I felt giddy because of drinking poisonous water. Two other people also died from the poisonous water. At that moment, my brother managed to buy some terramycin tablets and paid 100 sang for each.   

**Q:**  From where did he buy terramycin tablet?   

**A:**  He bought them from our soldiers. We took rest in that place for three days.   

**Q:**  What was the name of that place?   

**A:**  That was Mitikha. By then, they distributed 90 bullets to each of the soldiers. At that time, there were only about 290 riders left out of 770 soldiers. Some of them were killed in the battles and some of them got scattered and some of them ran away.   

**Q:**  About 500 soldiers were missing, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then I sent Derge Phurba Trinley and Tsering Ngodrub [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་དངོས་གྲུབ] who was killed in Tramog [Tib. སྤྲ་རྨོག], to tell Andru Jinda that I want to ask for leave because I am sick and I would cause trouble for the regiment instead of being a help because there were others wounded and I would be coming with three wounded. So I will first go to a corner [quiet spot] and take a rest. Jinda said, "Of course, I will grant you a leave. You had a very hard time. But you can't take care of yourself so you should be careful." After I was granted the leave, I arrived at Nagshö Biru [ Tib. nag shod 'bri ru]. At that time, Biru Pön [Tib. དཔོན] instructed the miser and the miser treated me very well and didn't take money for hay and fodder for my horse. I took rest for a couple of days and recovered, and my brother also recovered quite well and was able to ride a horse. Then I sent a messenger to Andru Jinda. At that time, Jinda was at the place called Shagti. Jinda said I am very glad to hear that the two of you brothers have recovered from your illness and the wounds, and I have also recovered from my wound. So we will meet in Shagti. Then I asked the Lama Biru Shabdrung [Tib. འབྲི་རུ་ཞབས་དྲུང] to check the days to find an auspicious day [to depart]. He said that you should stay here until the beginning of the next month. Then Biru Pön took me from Biru to Shagti. However, by then Jinda had already left for Jagra Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར].   

**Q:**  The two of you met at Pembar, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then I left the only soldier with me at Jagra and I went to Pembar.   

**Q:**  At that time, had you been appointed as a Commander (Tib. མགཇི)?   

**A:**  I was a magji and also a tsondzin. When I met Jinda, he told me, "I am very glad that you recovered from the illness. Now I have to send some people to Powo Tramog [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་སྤྲ་རྨོག] to fight a battle. Tomorrow all of our soldiers should gather at Pembar. We are sending half of the troops to Tramog." On the next day I went to Pembar with 44 riders from Targye Gomba. I sent 22 riders to Pembar and I kept 22 riders with me and I told him that I am going to Tramog. Jinda said, "You should not go to Tramog because your brother hasn't recovered well. You should stay here. Then I couldn't say anything and I sent 22 riders to Tramog. At that time, the soldiers had to draw lots for dividing the horses regarding where they would graze. The result of the lots was that the horses that belonged to Targye Gomba were to be grazed in Pembar and the horses that belonged to Litang were to be kept in a Gelugpa Monastery near the Shargongla [Tib. ཤར་དོང་ལ] mountain pass. At that time, I told Jinda that the Litang people should stay in that monastery because their horses were also kept in that monastery. I will also go to the monastery to graze the horses. He said that he has to ask the Gyagpön (leader of 100 troops) about that. Then Jinda said that it is decided that you can go to the monastery, but you have to leave somebody to attend the meetings. So I left Targye Gomba Künsang Penjor in Pembar to attend the meetings. Before I went to the monastery, Andru Jinda told me, "You should perform a ritual of worship to Gyalchen Shungden in the monastery for three days. We will pay the cost of the that later on." At that time, Jinda had made elaborate costumes for Aba Yalo for going into trance and he gave him a tan colored horse and appointed a servant for him. Jinda had promoted his position. After that, during my stay in the monastery, for three days Jinda sent 5 riders from the Chantreng group and 2 riders from the Litang group to my presence and he gave the order that I have to go to Rongpo Rabden [Tib. རོང་པོ་རབ་བརྟན] Monastery. By then, I knew that he didn't send me to Tramog because he wanted to send me to Rabten Monastery. He had been deceiving me like this. Then Jinda told me, "The monastery and the farmers in Rongpo Rabden Monastery were planning to fight with the enemy. So you should go there and fight with the enemy. You can consult with Tenzin Lhundrup. I took some soldiers from Targye Gomba and the 7 riders from Chantreng group and I went to the Rabten Monastery. At that time, I was told that the fighters from the monastery and the farmers will gather in the place called Drilethang [Tib. ?]. I stayed in the house of one of the main monks of that monastery called Khutsujung [Tib. ?]. Just after that, 4 of the monks from the monastery killed a Chinese soldier and the interpreter ran away to their regiment.   

**Q:**  Was that a Chinese soldier?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time there was a Chinese regiment in that place where we planned to fight. On the next day, I heard the secret was revealed.   

**Q:**  What secret was revealed?   

**A:**  Four of the monks attacked a Chinese man and took away his gun and the interpreter managed to run away to the Chinese regiment. Then I heard that perhaps the main military officer [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] of the Chinese regiment might go to the other side of the river to visit a woman because tomorrow is a holiday. I told Tenzin Lhundrup to send a lookout and let me know if the Chinese officer comes to that place.   

**Q:**  Was Tenzin Lhundrup a monk of that monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. He was the main one in charge of the monastery. Right after that, I heard that the Chinese military officer was going there. so I took 7 soldiers with me and went to that place. At that moment, I saw that the Chinese officer stopped and thought for awhile and then returned back and he didn't go to the woman. Then I told the soldiers, "Can we reach the Chinese officer if we shoot him from here." They said we can reach him. Then all eight of us shot at the Chinese from this side of the river, but he wasn't hit. He shot his pistol towards us 5-6 times and then he entered the house called Drilepön. The house had an eastern and a southern gate. I sent 6 of my soldiers to the eastern gate and I stayed at the southern gate with one soldier. After that, Drilepön came out and I asked him whether the Chinese was in his house? He said "Yes, the Chinese came in my house and he has brought some yellowish shining thing. I didn't know what was that. Now, he is upstairs." Then I told one of the soldiers who was with me, "You stay at the gate. I will go inside." I didn't trust Drilepön. His house was a very big one, so I looked for him on the first floor, but he wasn't there. Then I heard the sound of his steps that he was going upstairs. At that time, I was carrying a Mauser rifle. I hung the rifle on my neck and loaded my pistol with 10 bullets and I climbed up the set of stairs which was brand new. When I got on the top of the new stairs, I thought if I have to fight hand-to-hand with the Chinese while I am carrying the rifle, probably, I would not be able to stand up. So I took off my rifle and put it on the stairs. Then I pushed the door while I was holding my pistol. At that moment, the Chinese was in that room. I didn't know many Chinese were there, but I said to hand over the gun. Then he handed his pistol to me. Then I seized him from his chest and took him out. He was a very strong man. Right at that place, one of my servants and one of the Andrutsang's servants got to that place. I told them to bring me a rope and tie up the Chinese. When two of them tied him up, he was spitting on their faces many times. He was very aggressive. He looked like a Chinese from Xinjiang and he was very strong and imposing. I told them to take him to the Rabten Monastery and hand him over to Tenzin Lhundrup. Right after that, 4 of the monks of the Rabten Monastery came along walking to that place carrying rifles to fight. When they charged towards the Chinese regiment, 12 Chinese soldiers came out. They were coming to receive their leader and they had carried a Bren-gun. Then we fought with them and killed 5 of the Chinese and 7 of them ran away. We took the rifles of the 5 soldiers and their Bren-gun. Then I went to the monastery. The Chinese officer had already been taken in the monastery and Tenzin Lhundrup said "The Chinese didn't say a single word when we interrogated him. He didn't tell anything about the number of soldiers and about their weapons. You should better do something. Otherwise, we can't handle him." At that time, I told one of my soldiers called Tserima, "Just go ahead and kill him." Then I heard two gunshots and the soldier came in. I asked him, "Did you kill him" He said "Yes." I asked him "Where did you shoot him?" He said, "I shot him twice on his back and killed him. If you have any Chinese to be killed, please let me kill them. But, if you tell me to slaughter yaks, I won't do that." I said "Yes." At that time, Tenzin Lhundrup told me "Now, you should go up to the Chala mountain pass, because if the Chinese one here, probably we would not be able to handle them, but we are going to attack the Chinese regiment." Then when I took my soldiers and went up, I saw there were some Chinese in a road maintenance squad house in a place called Yangando [Tib.?] In that place, the soldiers from 4 local places, Kyongpa, Yetha, Mari and Trasum [Tib. ?] had arrived there when we attacked the maintenance squad.   

**Q:**  Did you fight with the Chinese in that place?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  Were there Chinese soldiers there?   

**A:**  There were 16 Chinese soldiers and a woman. We killed all of them. They had the long barrel 303 English Carbines [Tib. དབྱིན་ཇི་ཁ་རིང] and they also had the 303 English Carbines. Probably, they robbed them from the Tibetan Government. Then I divided all the things that we got from that place to the soldiers from Kyongpa, Yetha, Mari and Trasum. I myself didn't take a single item. Then I went to the Chala Mountain pass and I saw some nomads living there. I told them to do something to destroy the highway so that the vehicles would not be able to pass by. The nomads said "We can't do that because it is winter [and the earth was frozen]. Right after that, we heard that the Chinese have arrived at the other side of the mountain pass. Then we crossed the mountain pass and we saw there were 5 persons wearing blue clothes.   

**Q:**  Were they Chinese?   

**A:**  No, they weren't. They just wore the Chinese clothes.   

**Q:**  What were they doing there?   

**A:**  They had been staying with the Chinese regiment. When they heard that the monks of the Rabten Monastery are going to attack the Chinese regiment, they were running away. At that moment, we seized those 5 persons and made a bonfire at the middle and surrounded them. On the next morning, we knew that they were from Kyongpa and Yetha and they were just working in the Chinese regiment. So we sent them back to their homeland. Later, we knew that among the 5 people, one of them happened to be the interpreter who was beaten by the monks of the Rabten monastery and ran away to the Chinese regiment. So we seized him and sent two soldiers to hand him over to Rabten Monastery. When I stayed in Chala for two days, I heard that they were unable to handle the Chinese Regiment. Therefore, I sent the fighters from the four places; Kyongpa, Yetha, Mari and Trasum to Rabten Monastery and the farmers as the reinforcement. After that, I heard that they couldn’t handle the Chinese regiment. Then I went down and held a meeting in the place called Drilethang where all the soldiers from the above mentioned four places attended. At that time, it was said at the meeting that if the Chushigandru didn't have better cannons, they couldn't handle the Chinese regiment.   

**Q:**  Were there many soldiers in the Chinese regiment?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, I said at the meeting, "It will be useless because there is not enough time to go to get cannons from Chushigandru. Although we came out as volunteers to attack the Chinese regiment, we were unable to handle the regiment. So all of our people should not attack the regiment. At first, I will go there as a volunteer to enter the Chinese regiment. Volunteers should come from the four places mentioned above, Rabten Monastery and from the farmers. If I don't come back after entering the regiment, all of the soldiers from the Rabten Monastery and the farmers can kill me right away. I will sign a guarantee letter that you won't get any problems if you kill me. If any of the volunteers don't enter the regiment and come back, I will kill them right away. You should also sign a letter that there won't be any problem killing you. After this, we are going to attack the Chinese regiment." Then, they said, "It is not right to spoil/waste [Tib. འཕྲོ་བརླག] the people like this."   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  Tenzin Lhundrup who was the main monk in charge of the Rabten Monastery said that. He said, "We can't do that." At that time, we heard that the Chinese have arrived at Chala Mountain Pass. Then Tenzin Lhundrup said, "You should send the soldiers of the Rabten Monastery and from the farmers to the mountain pass. I am also going there. Keep the soldiers from the four places; Kyongpa, Yetha, Mari and Trasum in this place." But we actually sent the soldiers from the four places to the mountain pass because there were only 20 riders from the Rabten Monastery.   

**Q:**  Where did you go?   

**A:**  I was also among the soldiers going to the mountain pass. When I reached the place called Richudo located at the lower part of Chala, 20 riders from the monastery were coming back and said that the fighters from the four places had left for home.   

**Q:**  Weren't the fighters from the four places in Chushigandru?   

**A:**  No, they just came from the local places. Then I told them that we should go up [to the pass]. The riders of Rabten Monastery said, "We are not going up. We should take care of the monastery. We can't handle the enemies because there was a tank corps there and there were also trucks." I told them. "I will guarantee that we can kill Chinese, but I can't guarantee that we can handle them and stop the Chinese from coming."   

**Q:**  At that moment, you thought like that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They said, "It is not okay if we don't go back." Then the 20 riders said that they are going to hold a meeting in Drilethang, but when we got back to Drilethang, the 20 riders had gone back to their monastery.   

**Q:**  They didn't hold the meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that point I couldn't control them. They were not obedient. So something bad might happen internally. Then I brought my own 15-20 soldiers and crossed the mountain pass and went to Yuchukha [Tib. གཡུ་ཆུ་ཁ] in the direction where our main troops were. At that time, the monks of the Rabten Monastery and the farmers lost their territory and ran away to Yuchukha. When I got to Jagra Pembar, Kelsang Chöndze was there. At that time, Andru Jinda had left for Tshawa Pagshö [Tib. ཚ་བ་དཔའ་ཤོད] to get some guns and they had arrived at Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ]. Then I was told to go to Shopando. So I went to Shopando. Andru Jinda was in Shopando. He told me that there were [only] about 40 guns in Shopando, but there was quite a good amount of ammunition. At that time, the Chantreng Lama Gyara Trülku [Tib. རྒྱ་ར་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] had ran away from Kham and he had about 60 mules. Andru Jinda went to see the Gyara Trülku. Andru Jinda was a person who believes 100% in the deities. He was kind of stupid [Tib. ཀླད་ལྐུགས]. Actually, he should watch and investigate things himself. But he didn't know how to do that. I heard that he also told the Gyara Trülku about asking Aba Yalo, the oracle, to go into trance. At that time, Gyara Trülku told Jinda, "In the beginning, when the oracle was made to start going into trance, who knows whether he was really going into trance. So don't believe in deities. You should leave and go to India via Lhoka. You shouldn't stay here." Before that, I had sent 22 soldiers to Powo Tramog. From among them ten soldiers came back and one of them was wounded and 12 soldiers had disappeared. Then they held a meeting and I didn't attend the meeting and I sent Lolo [Tib. བློ་བློ] to attend the meeting in my place. Andru Jinda said that Jama Ngagdrug should attend the meeting. Then Andru Jinda told me that I have to go to Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན]. He was also going there. He was preparing to go back to Lhoka. Then I told Jinda "I am not going to Tengchen because I have sent 22 soldiers to Tramog and 12 of them have disappeared. First I have to check out what happened to the fighters, so I can't go to Tengchen." Then he said "You are right. You are not to be blamed about this matter. You have to check out what happened to your fighters."   

