# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0022.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 27 April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1913  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ] was a clerk in the Tseja Treasury Office who then became the dzongpön of Lhapsö [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ] Dzong in Dakpo. In this interview, he first discusses his organization of a meeting of the 28 dzong in southern Tibet. He discusses Chushigandru's efforts to find food by starting a volunteer militia force in 1958. He also talks about distributing propaganda leaflets from Jenkhentsisum. Finally, he discusses the political attitudes towards the Khambas.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0022_02/H_0022_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1958 you were at Lhapsö Dzong, right? Now at that time, whether you were at Lhasa or Lhoka - what was the situation like? In 1958, the Chushigandru had came to Lhoka, right? Then a volunteer militia force of about 9,800 locals were recruited. So how did it begin - what was the reason for starting this?   

**A:**  The reason it first started was that Chushigandru had came to the south and began their military regiment which was coming along well. However, they had a lot of people and we, the dzongs in Lhoka and Dakpo, had to provide food for them and fodder for their horses. When they said to sell them things, whether we did or did not do so, they did not have the money to pay us. We had to give them foodstuffs. We had to provide food items for them. If such a military camp [Tib. དམག་སྒར] was there and if we could keep and guard the southern territory clean [free of Chinese], then if the Dalai Lama came to the south, the road for him would be clear. It was not that we couldn't support them [the Khambas], but in order to avoid the Khambas using things without [the peasants] feeling regret, [we thought that] if the tsodrag of the dzong and estates work together with the Khambas, and if we told them that we will satisfy your needs if the stewards [Tib. ཉེརཔ] from both side would work together. We could use things economically and avoid unnecessary expenditures and the peasants won't have trouble. Since this was the case, this suggestion was put forward and we said that if this happened it would be good, so what do you think? At that time I was the Lhapsö Dzong in Dakpo. The Nubchog [Tib. ནུབ་ཕྱོགས] Dingpön [Western Officer] who was the elder brother of Kungö Draktenla [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན་ལགས] was also there. He was a Jola. I think his name was Sonam Tobgyela [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་སྟོབས་རྒྱས་ལགས]. So we two wrote letters and this Jola had a wide area under him and he communicated with the other dzongs. Then we communicated with the various dzong and estates of the southern area and Lhodrag[ Tib. lho brag]. So everyone agreed and said that this was a good idea. They said that since the harvest was over towards the end of the 8th Tibetan month, it would be a good idea [to meet then in Lhüntse] because the Lhoji is also near to us because we must also consult the Lhoji [the governor of southern Tibet]. It would not look nice if we left him aside and meet separately and do something on the side. At that time, the Lhoji was Tsador Khenjung Ngawangla and the lay official was Rimshi Kungö Jorgye. So we agreed and the representatives of the 28 dzong of the Lhoka-Lhodrag met at Lhüntse Dzong. These we discussed back and forth. The Lhüntse Dzongpön were Kungö Ngawang Chösangla [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཆོས་བཟང] and Jogpey. We consulted them and Kungö Tsipön Namseling and Trekhang Samjola who had been sent by the government to [talk with] Chushigandru. It seems that together with the tsipön and khenjung some representatives of the great monasteries were sent there. The representatives, however, were not there then, but Tsipön Namling [Namseling] was there. Tsipön Namling and the Nubchog Dingpön had good relations. The Jola consulted Kungö Namling and he told us to meet soon. So we went and met.   

**Q:**  At Lhüntse Dzong, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Lhüntse Dzong had a main room where the dzong passed judgements. We met on the roof for about 3 to 4 days. We got the opinions of the various dzong and estates and wrote a resolution to establish a volunteer militia force and about how we could provide them [Chushigandru] with their necessities by having joint stewards. This organisation was not to be forced under the authority [Tib. དབང་ཤེད་བཙན་སྐུལ] of the dzong as that would cause inconvenience for the government [since the Kashag had not approved this]. Anyway, it said we should publicize about the killing of people and all the bad things that happened in the Kham area and tell everyone that if we remain like this [doing nothing], there will be no alternative except to suffer that same fate. Therefore, if we can guard the southern areas well, then our Jenkhentsisum has relations with the US and Chushigandru and so our area will have support from there and we will do our part and gradually the southern area can be our capital and slowly we can fight against the Chinese. So we made a resolution about this. In the resolution, we said, "Let us make a petition to the State. If we go to hand in the petition, then the Chinese will arrest us. Since there [postal services in] Nangkartse Dzong, we will send a letter through there by post to the 6 dzong of Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ] and Taktse [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ] [areas around Lhasa] and the 18 dzong in Tsang as well as another letter to the meeting of the 60-70 people in Böd [Lhasa] which was meeting to discuss how to 'cause the Khamba disturbance to subside and mollify the Chinese anger'. [Note: "bod" is used today to refer to "Tibet," but at this time it more commonly referred to Central Tibet, and in this case to Lhasa where this meeting was held.] So we made a petition which said, "When the Chinese came to Tibet, whether it was regarding the traditional Buddhist faith or the thinking [Tib. བཞེད་སྲོལ] of the early religious kings, or whatever it was - they made much suffering [Tib. བརྡབ་གསིག] and made it unbearable for the people to live. In the Kham area, they made the miser's lives unlivable and so the Chushigandru came from there to Lhasa. Even in Lhasa, they made much commotion and so they [Khambas] came to Lhoka and that's how it is now. When they came to Lhoka, there were tens of thousands [actually about 2-3,000 initially] of Khambas and we in the southern dzong had to feed them but it was impossible to feed them. Because of this we became like the proverb, "The steel and the sharpening stone are together both being worn out." [Tib. ལྕགས་བརྡར་མཉམ་ཟད] So before the unrest erupts, we want to be able to protect our own areas. Just now the Chinese are saying that they are stopping the imperialists in Tibet, but till now we have not handed a piece of territory even the size of one's palm over to foreigners and we will continue to protect our country by ourselves. Ever since the time of the Religious Kings it was said, "The Chinese are happy in China and Tibetans and happy in Tibet." Therefore, we don't want China to help us and the Chinese should please leave. If you [Chinese] have to stay, then it is alright for some representatives to stay. The Dalai Lama and Kashag [Tib. རྒྱལ་བློན་ལྷན་རྒྱས] should consult together and the Assembly should please take up the matter." So we sent a petition by post to the Assembly [which was meeting then] and to the 6 dzongs of Phembo and Taktse saying that this is what we are doing and that you also must do this work. To the 18 dzong of Tsang, we said we are making this petition and you should all join together to push the matter and together join in the volunteer [militia] force. We are not forcing you [Tib. བཙན་དབང] [to do this]. We have almost 9,000, almost 10,000 [militia] and if you include our tsodrag we have 10,000. So you should think along these lines. One letter was sent to Tsang. So we did such work and discussed all this at once with the Lhoji. At that time, Namseling was at Lhagyari Gombo Khangsar [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཁང་གསར] so we showed this to him and he said it was good. So the letter was sent through Nangkartse Dzong, the head of which was the monk official Wöse Pembar [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་དཔལ་འབར]. He later came to TCV in Dharamsala and became a teacher and died. Then we had made a military list [Tib. དམག་གཞུང] of the militia from the dzong and estates and the tsodrag and we told them that they should all come to Yarlung before the 10th Tibetan month [roughly mid-December 1958]. So we took the militia soldiers to Yarlung. When I was leaving Lhapsö dzong, the other dzongs were doing the same. Our miser came out to give us [the militia who were leaving] scarves and chang and they burned incense and gave us tea and droso-chemar. So in this way we went. The soldiers were sent ahead and we the dzong and estate [officials], the tsodrag and me with my 36 sidekicks from better-off households and one or two servants. So we rode in a procession and wore the scarves. That night we stayed at the Lhapsö Estate and the next day we went to E [Lhagyari]. Chushigandru had already come to Yarlung and so we went and stayed at the Yarlung military camp. Later, as I told you the other day, when the Dalai Lama was coming [fleeing from Lhasa], the yearly taxes, Übü [Tib. དབུས་འབུལ] of the dzongs and estates in Dakpo and Kongpo were not sent to the capital, but we said that we need them here since the Dalai Lama was arriving here and all the payroll offices of the southern dzong were allotted to the Chushigandru military salary and so we also needed this for the military salary and the butter and other items I went to collect. At that time, I did not meet the Dalai Lama when the Dalai Lama came to Yarlung. After the Dalai Lama left, then Kungö Namseling said, "The Dalai Lama has left and if we keep the tsodrag --the prominent people-- here, then the various areas will face difficulty if we keep the people from there who can think." He said we should send the leaders back. At Lhüntse Dzong an independent Tibetan government was established and the civil and military affairs were headed by Tsipön Namseling and Trekhang Khenjung. And in Yarlung, we joined forces with Chushigandru so a military secretary of the Military Headquarters was needed so Namseling said, "You, Chaknang Chime Gombo must stay. You should choose whoever you want as a colleague. Then keep two commanders (magji) and those in charge from the dzong and send the rest back." So this was discussed and the various representatives chose the lay official Jogpey. So the two of us stayed at Yarlung and the others returned. So after the Dalai Lama left, I can't remember the date, whether it was the 3rd Tibetan month or so, the Chinese came to Yarlung. I told you about that last time. And so in this way through Mön Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] I came to India.   

**Q:**  The meeting that you had at first was at Lhüntse Dzong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In this meeting who was there? You met in the dzong, right?   

**A:**  Yes. All the people were there from the dzongs, estates and the tsodrag. The main ones who wrote the letters were Gyatsa Dzong Nubchog Dingpön Kotsa [Tib. ?], Jola and I. We wrote the letters and we all made the document and we also showed it to Gadrung Ngawang Chösangla. Before we made things definite, we also showed it to the two Lhoji. Lhoji Tsador Kungö Khenjung Ngawangla also made some corrections. And so we made the letters and made guarantees/pledges [Tib. གན་རྒྱ]. Each area took the copies and we all went to E where Khenjung and Tsipön [Namling-Samjola] were staying. There we met them and then we each returned to our places. And so when we came to Yarlung, we each came on our own. When we got to Yarlung, Kungö Namseling had already arrived. He was staying at the Yarlung Phodrang.   

**Q:**  At the meeting that you had at Lhüntse Dzong, did the Lhoji come?   

**A:**  No. The 28 representatives (of the dzongs) were there.   

**Q:**  When you were starting the volunteer militia force, how was it going to be organized. Did one person have to come from each family?   

**A:**  No. We said it is now a matter of religion and politics and so if you want to come it is voluntary. Now that Chushigandru is here, we should help and join forces with them [Tib. དཔུང་རོགས] and so we should not be like the proverb, "When the round thing is rolling down from the mountain, the elongated thing should not stay there watching the fun." [Tib. རིལ་རིལ་རྦབ་ལ་རིལ་དུས། འཇོང་འཇོང་ལྟད་མོ་བལྟས་ནས་སྡོད་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་མ་རེད]. When we have joined forces, we should protect our own region and if we form a force [Tib. དཔུང], the existing [Khamba] army will only get stronger. Now all the men and the animals of Chushigandru have to be fed by the 28 dzong of Lhoka and Dakpo, so if we don't send our own stewards (nyerpa), we can't afford the expenses. Firstly, for the protection of the country and secondly, if we have a strong force [Tib. དཔུང་ཤོག] then we will have the hope to enter Lhasa, drive the Chinese out, and look after our own country. And so if our organisation makes relations with the dzongs in Tsang and Ütsang then we can manage to mobilize all the militia of the country. So we agreed that if we did this, it would be good. I heard that our edict went even to Tsang and even to the various dzong and the estates of Tö. Chushigandru had gone there and some militia also came from there. So from the dzong in Tsang and down to Kham, Khyungpo, Serta Karnag [Tib. སེར་ཚ྄་དཀར་ནག] it is said that our letter got there. You know Gyado Thöndrubla [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་དོན་གྲུབ་ལགས], the one who lost his life in the Bangladesh campaign. Now he had gone down that way and he said that our letter reached even down there [Kham side]. So the joining of forces was coming along very well, however, while this was going on, the Chinese made a major assault at Yarlung and we could not manage. But this push [attempt at organising large militia force] had made fine progress. And even in Bö, they said that they had received the petition.   

**Q:**  Now the numbers of recruits from the various dzong, how did you decide on this?   

**A:**  It was all voluntary. It depended on the size of the dzong and the estates. Our Lhapsö dzong was not big, there were about 700 miser so there were only about 500 soldiers. For example, the dzong close to us, Gyatsa Dzong, at this place there is our Nubchog Jola and a dzong substitute. This dzong had more than 800 militia. So in this way each of the various dzong had volunteers, like 500, 600, 700 according to the size of the dzong and so all of the militia, in the old Tibetan custom, like the Trapchi soldiers had dresses dyed in yellow and on their shoulder there was the name of such and such dzong volunteer force. Each dzong and estates had their seal [Tib. རྫོང་དམ] on the militia list [Tib. དམག་གཞུང). The list was given to the Khenjung and the Tsipön [Namseling-Samjola] and the Chushigandru Tsondzin. All the militia lists were not given to them. Since we were the Kandrey Magjigang [Joint Khamba Militia Headquarters] and we were together [joined] with the Khambas we kept the original list. I made a copy saying that we have such and such soldiers and you all discuss to see to which areas they should be sent and the Chushigandru should consult with us. In this way the militia were assigned and sent.   

**Q:**  You said that there were how many- 28 dzong?   

**A:**  I can't remember exactly this and that, but there were the 4 dzong of Dakpo and Kongpo, the 4 dzong of Lhoka-Lhodrag, Wöka [Tib. འོལ་ཁ], Wönsam [Tib. ?]. In the Yarlung area there was Chongye [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས], Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང], and - I can't recall- then Trapchi [Tib. གྲ་ཕྱི] and Tranang [Tib. གྲ་ནང], Nangkartse, Gongkar, Döl Shidü [Tib. དོལ་གཞིས་སྡོད]], now I can't remember the names very well.   

**Q:**  When Chushigandru came to Lhoka were the people not giving food and other things? How was it?   

**A:**  They [the Khambas] asked the better off families to sell and so they had to sell and when they sold, then half the things were paid and the other half were not paid. They didn't get much of a price. Later, we brought the things [Tib. སྤུས་འདོན] and paid them the "military salary" [gave the foodstuffs to the Khambas without receiving the market rate] and it was agreed that they will not take things from the miser. However, since there were different people like riders and muleteers, they took a little bit of weapons and horses and mules and there were also misbehavior and even raping women - these things are expected, isn't it? But they were trying their best to put a stop to these things. There was no way of paying according to the [real] price. It is [just] said it was paid. When they were at Drigu, we sent a lot of Tsampa. The 4 dzong of Dakpo and Kongpo, I think, sent 60-70 yaks for meat. Then we asked the better off families to give Tsampa since we, the Lhapsö Dzong, could not [give from our collected taxes] since we had to deliver the income to the Tseja Office. So we asked well-off families. For example, we had the very rich family called Gödön [Tib. ?], the one that Denyertsang Tobla [Tib. གདན་གཉེར་ཚང་སྟོབས་ལགས] went to as a magpa. This family and then Lhapsö Tsodrag Debor [Tib. ?] each gave 500 khe of barley. Then the other better-off families gave 20, 30 to 100 khe. The tsampa was ground and transported along with the woolen sacks and transported from one satsig station to the next [Tib. ས་ཚིགས་དོས་ཁལ] and the people in E transported a lot. This was from Dakpo. Then from the Kyemdong [Tib. སྐྱེམ་སྟོང] side they did the same, and Wöka and others must have also sent. Then all the other areas of Lhoka had agreed to send.   

**Q:**  So was this sold or what?   

**A:**  It was said it was sold, but there was no money to collect when it was "sold." They [the Khambas] were only men and horses [i.e., they had no fields] and so there was nothing to do but to feed them. What we were thinking was that if the [militia] reinforcements became strong and good then we could challenge the Chinese and one's country could be one's own. Then our militia and the government could join forces.   

**Q:**  When Chushigandru came to Lhoka were the people not giving food and other things? How was it?   

**A:**  They [the Khambas] asked the better off families to sell and so they had to sell and when they sold, then half the things were paid and the other half were not paid. They didn't get much of a price. Later, we bought the things [Tib. སྤུས་འདོན] and paid the military salary and it was agreed that they will not take from the miser. However, since there were different people like riders and muleteers, they took a little bit of weapons and horses and mules and there were also misbehavior and even raping women - these things are expected, isn't it? But they were trying their best to put a stop to these things. There was no way of paying according to the price. It is [just] said it was paid. When they were at Drigu, we sent a lot of Tsampa and the 4 dzong of Dakpo and Kongpo, I think, sent 60-70 yaks for meat. Then we asked the better off families to give Tsampa since we, the Lhapsö Dzong, cannot [give from our collected taxes] since we had to deliver the income to the Tseja Office. So we asked well-off families. For example, we had the very rich family called Gödön [Tib. ?], the one that Denyertsang Tobla [Tib. གདན་གཉེར་ཚང་སྟོབས་ལགས] went to as the magpa. This family and then Lhapsö Tsodrag Debor [Tib. ?] each gave 500 khe of barley. Then the other better-off families gave 20, 30 to 100 khe. The tsampa was ground and transported along with the woolen sacks and transported from one relay station to the next [Tib. ས་ཚིགས་དོས་ཁལ] and the people in E transported a lot. This was from Dakpo. Then from the Kyemdong [Tib. སྐྱེམ་སྟོང] side they did the same, and Wöka and others must have also sent. Then all the other areas of Lhoka had agreed to send.   

**Q:**  So was this sold or what?   

**A:**  It is said it was sold, but there was no money to collect when it was "sold." They are only men and horses [with no fields] and so there is nothing to do but to feed them. What we had hoped was that there was an occasion when the Dalai Lama was going to go to Chönkorgye [Tib. ཆོས་འཁོར་རྒྱལ] [traditional trip Dalai Lama takes after completing his geshe exams], so when the Dalai Lama went to Chönkorgye then our soldiers would go - like this- from Chönkorgye to the southern part of the river and then the northern side of the river and then to Dakpo and through Tsari he could easily go to India. At that time, we could hope to manage to bring the Dalai Lama out. We hoped we would be able to do this. So in one swift move we hoped to bring the Dalai Lama [to India] because there was no way we wanted to leave the Dalai Lama in Chinese hands. So we hoped to do that and in Lhapsö dzong we stored fresh grass in houses plastered with mud in the hopes of using this for the Dalai Lama's horses when he came to Chönkorgye. So we got the grass, fodder, hay and firewood all ready, but before we were able to do this, during the Mönlam of 1959 as soon as the Dalai Lama's ceremony was over, the Chinese started the disturbance. So the plan was to get the militias all ready and then when the Dalai Lama came to Chönkorgye we would all of a sudden bring him and then begin the challenge. So that was the idea. Even at Lhasa, we were making connections for this. At the Tseja Office we had Tseja Gyentsenla and through him we had connections with Kungö Chemmo [Phala]. Chushigandru and Kungö Chemmo had connections, right? Our connection was through me to Tseja Gyentsenla.   

**Q:**  Yes, I was going to ask about that. Since 1957, Phala Drönyerchemmo, Namseling and Andru [Gombo Tashi] had connections right? So through them didn't they say that one has to help Chushigandru. Were their no secret messages sent saying this?   

**A:**  We did not get any special secret messages. However, Kungö Namseling had come, right? - and he was telling us that we must help them otherwise they will rob the miser. That's true and the various dzong of Dakpo,like Dakpo Kurog Namgyal [Tib. སྐུ་རབ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], they did not have the actual dzongpön on site. Only the representatives of the dzongpön were there. They were monk and lay officials. Now I don't remember their names. They asked me to send a letter saying that they have to sell items [to the Khambas] just as Lhapsö Dzong had done and that since their real dzongpön is not here, Lhapsö dzong should take the responsibility. I said that that's alright even if the Chinese know about it. Even if the Chinese and Kashag scold me that's alright. So I sent an order to the other dzong like Kurog Namgyal, Shey Kyemtong [Tib. བཞད་སྐྱེམས་སྟོང], and Gyatsa. The order stated that, "We at Lhapsö have send such and such quantities as butter, and so many animals for butchering, and so much grain, so since your dzongs are much wealthier than ours, get things ready ][to send]. Roast the barley grain and grind it. Chushigandru had sent about 6 persons per shipment to collect tsamba. So go with them and transport the grain. Bring your own food. If we have to use the government's corvée transportation system through the satsig stations then it would be like the proverb, "One exhausted yak would cause 100 yaks to get exhausted." [Tib. གཡག་ཆད་གཅིག་གིས་གཡག་ཆད་བརྒྱ] and we would not be able to handle it. So today the volunteer militia have decided to help and so you yourself must transport the goods to Drigu." So I send such a letter. So they said that Lhapsö Dzong send such a letter and since they have done this, we will also do the same and so all the various dzong of the southern region [Lhoka-Lhodrag] did this. So they [the Chinese] sort of put the blame on us. So that's what happened. Later, there was a propaganda leaflet [Tib. དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས] sent from Kalimpong and that too I distributed. So the Chinese reported that to the Kashag and Kashag sent me an edict saying that it seems like that you are doing reckless things so you better behave yourself. If not then we will have to send a messenger on horseback and recall you. Since such things happened, the Chinese at Wökha had made a decision to send some soldiers to arrest me. At Wöka there was a tsodrag member who came to our dzong and tsodrag meeting. He was the one who was the shidü of Wöka Shömo Estate. He sent a messenger who said that [the Chinese] had such talks and that on such and such date they are coming to arrest you. So don't stay around. So they told them that I had gone to E since the Khambas stole my horse and I had gone to settle the matter. The Chinese came to arrest me twice. Actually, I stayed in the upper valley of Lhapsö where I had a herd. Then the Chushigandru regiment was brought to Dakpo and a military camp was established at Dakpo Drumba [Tib. bhrum pa]. The Chinese usually came from the Gyatsa side, but they could not because the Chushigandru regiment was stationed in Gyatsa to defend the land. On the southern side of the river, starting at the river bank in Tsetang, Yarlung, Döl, Tranang, Trahyi, Gongkar and up to Nangkartse were completely under us the Khambas and our volunteer force so the Chinese were not able to come om this side [south of the Tsangpo River]. So that's how the area was clean [free of Chinese] when the Dalai Lama came. At first they [the Chinese] come often, pretending to be doing propaganda. They brought 15 soldiers and hoped to capture me, but they could not.   

**Q:**  The propaganda letter from Kalimpong was from Jenkhentsisum, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did it say?   

**A:**  It said that they are doing such and such work and you people must challenge the Chinese well with your volunteer force. And always publicize to the people that the Chinese are not good at all. And if your organisation goes well, then like we are doing for Chushigandru we will also send arms and ammunition to you. Now I don't remember it very well, but there a letter like this. There were many letters.   

**Q:**  Who brought it from there?   

**A:**  I think the letter was sent to Kungö Gyentsenla [Phala's associate]. I remember Kungö Gyentsenla's brother Kungö Tsendrön Yeshe Lhundrupla [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ལགས], the one who later returned to Tibet and "died" [Tib. སྐྱོན་ཤོར]. [note: He was the one who went to Tibet probably in 1988 and got arrested and beaten in the jail and died two months after he was released.] He brought the letter one morning. There was a small box of letters. So I distributed the letters to the dzong in Dakpo and Kongpo. So because of this, the Chinese said that I did such a thing (laughter) and so they consulted with the Kashag and so the Kashag said, "You have distributed letters and it is said that you are paying military salary to the Khambas. This is harming the friendship between the Tibetans and the Chinese, so you had better behave. If not, we will recall you through a messenger. So the Kashag sent me a very stern order.   

**Q:**  It was said that the Khamba revolt must be subsided and so Kungö Namseling and Samjola arrived, right? Whether it is from the government or the Drönyerchemmo, was there a reason why Kungö Namseling was specially sent?   

**A:**  According to what Namseling said, this was not the case. It is said that the Chinese had a meeting at Yuthok [one of their main offices] at which. it is said, the drungtsi and kalön were there. The Chinese commander Tan Guansan, the one who suppressed Lhasa by force [in 1959], put the point of his finger right on the noses of Namseling and Surkhang and said, "That Tsipön Namseling and Surkhang Wangchen Gelek [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] are the ones who started this Khamba's disturbance [Tib. ཟིང་ཆང]." This is what Namseling said. Namseling replied that we are not responsible for the Khamba's disturbance. The way it started was that the Khambas could not stay at Lhasa because the Central Government was going to arrest them. And so they had no choice but to run away to Lhoka and it is not something that the two of us started. So Namseling said that he specially pointed his finger at their noses. Finally, it seems, they told the Kashag that in order to suppress the Khambas, the Tibetan army regiments should be sent. But the Kashag said that you are saying that you want us to sent in the Tibetan army. Yes, we can send them, but how can Tibetans suppress Tibetans. We have to send them with arms and what would happen if they join forces with Chushigandru. We can't take this responsibility. So you had better think ahead, but we will send if you tell us. Then they said, "Oh, this is good suggestion (laughter). And so they said, don't send [troops] but discuss. Kungö Namseling mentioned in his book that the Chinese were going to kill him and that the assassins were already in place. But he was lucky, because the Chinese said that this time, Tsipön Namseling must be sent to discuss with the Khambas. They specially named him and so he was sent. So because of this, his life was spared at Lhasa, but on the way he feared for his life. But this time, since the Chinese named him [Namseling] to go to Lhoka to discuss this, he was able to come to this side [India]. So this is what was mentioned in his book. Since he was close with the Khambas, the Chinese must have thought that he will flatter the Chinese and he could solve the issue. The Chinese were saying such impossible things like they wanted arms to be handed in and that everybody should just stay still. So that's what happened.   

**Q:**  You said something about the abbots of the Sera and Drepung also being sent.   

**A:**  Yes. It seems that they were there with Kungö [Namseling], but I don't know where they went later. There was a house of a chandzö of Lhagyari called Gombo Khangsar. When Kungö Namseling was Gyatsa Dzong, he had a daughter with the chandzö's wife. This daughter became the wife of the son of [Gombo Khangsar]. So because of this earlier connection, Kungö stayed there. Kungö Samjola stayed at Chö Changkhyim [Tib. ཆོས་ཆང་ཁྱིམ], which was the main estate of Trekhang at Chongye, and he mainly came down from there only for the meetings.   

**Q:**  So both of the kungö did not return to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  No, they had no intention of doing so. It is said that kungö sent for his wife. I don't know the details, but that's what I heard and I don't know whether he was able to sent for her or not. [note: she due to give birth so could not lave Lhasa].  

