# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0022.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1913  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ] was a clerk in the Tseja Treasury Office and then became the dzongpön of Lhapsö [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ] Dzong in Dakpo. In this interview, Chime Gombo discusses the meeting of the 28 dzong in Lhüntse Dzong and how the accommodations were arranged. He talks about the departure of the Dalai Lama to India and its effect on the Khambas and the Tibetan people. He differentiates the Kandrey Military Headquarters [joint militia-Khamba Headquarters] and the Chushigandru Headquarters and they how they functioned.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0022_03/H_0022_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time you said that a volunteer militia force was to be formed and that you all came to Yügye Lhüntse Dzong. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the estate [representatives] came. I wanted to ask you some details about this. You stayed there for about 3-4 days right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably we stayed for about 7 days.   

**Q:**  So when you got there, what happened in terms of meetings and when you went there where did you stay. For example you have to eat and the horses have to be given fodder. Was this given by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>? So how did things happen when you all got there?   

**A:**  When we got there each of us asked the people who were close to us to prepare housing. I forgot the name, in Yügye Lhüntse Dzong there is the monastery called Nyen Ditru [Tib. གཉན་སྡེ་དྲུག]. Below the monastery, there are some houses and we were to pay for the firewood, hay and fodder to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> and they prepared the houses. So the Yügye Lhüntse Dzongpön and the tsodrag discussed this and they got the houses ready for the people coming from the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. They did not accept payment for the hay but we gave money to buy the fodder. Rent [for housing] we don't have to pay, right? So Yügye Lhüntse Dzong played the host. From all the 28 dzong there would be representatives and each one would have their own hearth, right? For example, we from Lhapsö also had a hearth for us and our servants of the dzong and for two more better off tsodrag, and monastic representatives. So we were about 7-8 persons. Everybody else also had theirs, right? Then when we came to E, we borrowed houses from Shaglho [Tib. ཤག་ལྷོ] and Lhagyari. They made preparations for me at E Shaglho. So I stayed at E for a while and went to see Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>. Kungö advised and we had to meet once again in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> Dzong and all were there - from the 28 dzongs. There was a very large gathering hall called E Gombo Khangsar where we met and Kungö Namseling came and advised and we reported to him about our resolution. So even at these places the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> prepared things for us.   

**Q:**  So the meeting that you had with Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was after you already met at Lhüntse Dzong.   

**A:**  Yes. So we consulted Kungö and said we have done such things and we have made a resolution and we wanted to make this petition and so what do you think - is there anything that we should change? Kungö said that it was excellent. Now I don't know much about history, but the Nubchog Dingpön Kotsa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> was excellent in history and his composition and math were thorough. If Jola wrote a letter, then even Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> couldn't correct it. So Jola stayed there and E Gombo Khangsar Chandzö's wife was Jola's sister. She was earlier the wife of Kungö Namseling. He had a daughter. So Jola stayed with them. They asked me to stay with them, but I did not. Since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> and others workers were there I stayed at E Shaglho. They made preparations in the assembly hall.   

**Q:**  When you were having a meeting at Lhüntse Dzong how did it take place. Who spoke first. Some must have given their opinions, and did they say that they agreed or did some say that this was not a good, etc?   

**A:**  There was a place where Lhüntse Dzong's Ngawang Chösangla stayed. It was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> [which means below the <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>]. On one side was the quarters where the lay official Jokpey [stayed as he] did not have his own quarters at the dzong. The quarters at the dzong were held by Ngawang Chösangla. On the east side, there was a place where they both worked and there was a large awning [Tib. ཀ་ཕིབས] where meetings could be held. So we met there and the carpets were laid down by them. As far as the tea and rice, food, etc., these were given by the two dzongpön. Later, they would probably collect this from the miser. So at first we met and talked about what the situation was in the various dzongs; that we have to do this and that and so what do you think? Then we asked them to give their opinions which were written on paper. So we were collecting the written opinions and were referring to them and making the resolution at the same time. So this took about 3-4 days. Then we decided on a resolution and on the number of volunteer forces who were to meet before the 11th Tibetan month, that is before the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྔ་མཆོད] The holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ganden Ngamjö</a> [holiday] at Yarlung. The letters were to be sent via Nangkartse and everything was written down as a preliminary resolution. Then we did not call all the representatives, but the more prominent members of the Tsodrag were consulted on the resolution and whatever corrections were needed were made by them and since I had a good handwriting, I made a clean copy [the main resolution]. Kotsa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> and us - even though Kotsa Jola was there, I was the actual Lhapsö Dzongpön. I and the Nangkartse monk official [dzongpön] were there. The two of us were the main ones and Kungö Jokpey came, but Ngawang Chösangla did not come. And so Jokpey and the beard stayed up there and we stayed below and we gathered around and we discussed. Then the discussions were made into a resolution and then everybody signed. Later, we left the documents with Kotsa Jola . When the Chinese arrested him they took the documents.   

**Q:**  I see, they got the documents?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. I heard that many people were fixed up nicely [paid a price]. I guess they could not burn them.   

**Q:**  Now there was the question of assigning the stewards (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a>). Since there were so many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, it was said that if from your side some nyerpa were appointed [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes, we said that, but we did not have the time to do it. We said that we were going to appoint <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a>, but the Khambas were not agreeing to that. They wouldn't right? Now the Dalai Lama had left already right? The Khambas were not acting well and they were contemplating fleeing. For this reason Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> said that appointing nyerpa was not in accord with the wishes of the Khambas, so don't push the matter, just forget about it. Since the Dalai Lama has given use to all the government granaries [Tib. བཀར་ཁང] so for the time being the question of buying things from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> should be put on hold and then we can talk about it later. So the things we were to sell were held on to. Even the meat, we had given a lot of animals. The animals would be slaughtered and eaten, right? So they said that they needed a lot of meat and so the meat that was to be sold should be bought from the miser and pay the local rate. If we were to tell them to sell as before, since now we had lost territory, Lhasa was lost - we have to be diplomatic since the miser might not listen. So we became a bit stern. And since they did not allow us to appoint the nyerpa and the soldiers were distributed and sent with them [with the Khambas]. But things didn't last that much. And so later when the Khambas fled, the ones with horses fled earlier and our militia were being left behind. But, anyway they didn't have many problems.   

**Q:**  Now in the 10th month everyone was to gather at Yarlung right?   

**A:**  Yes, they all came.   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was there and the Kandrey Magjigang was begun. Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was also there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And Kungö Samjola was also there.   

**Q:**  Now if I were to ask you in detail about that, what did you do when you got there? You came with 500 soldiers and 36 young sidekicks. So when you got there what did you do in terms of housing and meetings?   

**A:**  We stayed with the Yarlung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, but they did not make the preparations. If the Yarlung Phodrang [palace] was here, then on the other side of the river, there was a large household whose name I have forgotten. He knew Dakpo Tobla and the Lhapsö Tsodrag Deybor so we had written earlier and said that we are coming so please put us up, so we stayed there. So each of the various groups stayed with some larger households.   

**Q:**  How did this Kandrey Military headquarters work?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama started the temporary Independent Government at Yügye Lhüntse Dzong [when he was fleeing]. So the two Kungö became the civil and military heads, right? So since the two were the heads according to the order of the Dalai Lama, Kandrey, the Tibetan government and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> together formed the Kandrey Military headquarters. Chushigandru had a separate building which was their Military headquarters. So when Chushigandru's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> and the Kungö had to work together it was called the Kandrey Military headquarters. Together they met at the large gathering hall of the Yarlung Phodrang. The hall had a large throne; probably for when the Dalai Lama had came earlier - but it could be later [the throne was the Dalai Lama's throne]. Since we were the Kandrey Military headquarters, we kept the original documents the list of the militia from the various dzongs and gave copies to Chushigandru. I put the seal of Lhapsö Dzong and gave to them [copies of document].   

**Q:**  And you were to have meetings there.   

**A:**  Yes. The office was always functioning. There were problems at the border with people travelling and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> taking up the arms and ammunitions [of those fleeing]. They were not allowing them to take the weapons with them [when people fled to India]. So there were problems when some people did not want to hand them over. When the two Kungö came, there were many other officials like Kungö Gyentsen Chundenla [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས] and Changtrela [Tib. བྱང་བཀྲས་ལགས]. Draktenla and them came later I think. However, many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> arrived and our Kungö Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] also came. So from here, the Kandrey Military headquarters escorted them and issued them permits. Otherwise they wouldn't allow them at the border, right? Since there was trouble.   

**Q:**  At that time had all the 10,000 volunteer militia arrived?   

**A:**  All the volunteers were distributed at the border among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> soldiers. The Khambas had regiments and they were given the militia list. They appointed the various positions.   

**Q:**  Now in their various regiments it is said that it was not only Khambas, but also a lot of others, right?   

**A:**  There were people from Central Tibet [Tib. üཙང]. Later they made an alphabetical name and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> group was I think called the Shadang Regiment. You know <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Jola, Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར], he was in the Shadang. When they made a list [of units by alphabetical names] there were names up to Sha [the consonant "sha"]. Now I don't remember much, but among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s there was the Baligyesum [Tib. 'ba li rhyal gsum] unit that included people from Batang, Litang and Gyaltang. They were the main one and they had all the various regiments arranged. Most of our Ütsang people were kept in the various groups. The volunteer militias were sent to be under various Khamba Commanders. Our rural militia had no commanders, but their overall Commander [Tib. མགཇི] was Kungö Jokpey and myself, but we were at the office in Yarlung. So they were all distributed and sent under the various Khamba gyagpön and jupön.   

**Q:**  Now at Lhüntse Dzong a new government was established and in that, Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and Andru Jinda [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་སྦྱིན་བདག] [Gombo Tashi] were in it, weren't they?   

**A:**  At first Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and Andru Jinda did it.   

**Q:**  The Kandrey military headquarters?   

**A:**  No, the Independent Government of Tibet. They were the regents [Tib. སྲིད་སྐྱོང], but the two of them did not stay and they went as the entourage of the Dalai Lama [to India]. Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> did not stay but it was definite that Andru Jinda was to return. At first Andru Jinda had not arrived from the north. After he arrived, he did not stay and went ahead. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> stayed for quite some time. Then later he too left. After he left, we stayed until the end. Kungö Namling went to E and Kungö Samjola left from Yarlung and Andru Jinda and Namling went ahead. They left from Lhüntse Dzong. We came with the Khambas, retreating and retreating.   

**Q:**  Now from what you have said, on the one hand there was the volunteer force, right? This had connections with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. Chushigandru had connections with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>. Jenkhentsisum sent letters, right? And they consulted Phala Drönyerchemmo and his group, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla and Kungö Namseling. It seems that they had a group.   

**A:**  Yes, it seems like they had an organisation.   

**Q:**  Yes. So I see that everyone seemed to be in it together.   

**A:**  Yes, everyone sort of got in like a sub-group, but our thing was done with us the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>s discussing this. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> did not specifically send letters and tell us to do something. However, we did have some relations; there was Nubchog Dingpön Kotsa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a>. After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> army arrived and created a lot of commotion, we sent a lot of things to be sold to the Khambas and this caused some hardships on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. So we said let's form a militia since with this it will be easier to talk. Otherwise, the miser are going to experience a lot of difficulties. At first, the Gyatsa Dzong Tsodrag and Nubchog Jola Kotsa Dingpön Sonam Tobgyela and I had a talk. After our talk, then from Gyatsa Dzong, we spoke with Kurog <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a>, and then at E we talked with a miser of the monastery called Lamdrin Depala [Tib. ?]. Then there were those under Lhagyari. I did not do the work, but we had our Lhasa Tsodrag Debor doing the work. His wife was the relative/sister of Kungö Champa Yöndenla [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]. They arrived at E and they discussed back and forth. Then we sent a letter to the various dzong and that's how we decided to get together at Yügye Lhüntse Dzong. At first, the talk began at Dakpo. From that time on, Kotsa Jola had discussions with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>. Jola sent a petition and Namseling said that it would be good to start one. Only later he told me this. Kungö had told him that if you can do something like this then it would be very good.   

**Q:**  When did Kungö say this? When you first started?   

**A:**  We did it in 1958. It was before the Dalai Lama left. The Dalai Lama left in 59, right? We started thinking [about these things] in - the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> came to Dakpo in the 3rd and 4th month. And so there were a lot of hardships [for the miser]. They were saying for us to come and arrange the taxes [giving things to the Khambas]. We said don't say that, but look after yourself. The Khambas were staying at Lhagyari and Drigu and all the routes fell on us. We said that since we are located on the road, you have robbed the miser. So we even got into some sort of argument too. The militias were causing some hardship. At that time, Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorji [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ] [he was the head of the Derge battalion] and their commanders were there and they robbed some of our miser. When we tried to talk to Namgyal Dorje, there was no way to talk to him. When we said that that was no way for his soldiers to act, he just got up and left. Then there was Baba Chandzö Tashi [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས] and some Litangbas [with those Khambas] and we said what do you think we should do because when we tried to talk to him, he did like that. So they said there is nothing to do. What is there to do? We will try and talk tactfully [Tib. མཁས་པོ]. So there were some prominent people in their group and unless they talked [to Namgyal Dorje], at that time there was no way for us to talk to Jagö Namgyal Dorje. He would just get up without listening.   

**Q:**  Last time, you said that the Dalai Lama was to visit Chönkorgye and that you all thought that if at that time you could suddenly whisk him away then it would be good. Why was the Dalai Lama going to Chönkorgye?   

**A:**  Chönkorgye was the seat of Dalai Lama Sonam Gyatso [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ] [the 3rd Dalai Lama], and there was a monastery there and there was also was a Lhamo temple [Tib. མགོན་ཁང] of Palden Lhamo [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ]. So as soon as all the Dalai Lama passed their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> exams [Tib. grwa skor mtsan rtags], they must visit Chönkorgye once. His predecessor also went there and saw Lhamo, and there was something about some Lhamo getting disturbed and that the Dalai Lama got smallpox. So as soon as the various Dalai Lamas completed their geshe exam, they had to go to Chönkorgye. So the [14th] Dalai Lama was to go there, but before he could do so, the disturbances started. So we were thinking of getter the fodder and everything ready and whisking the Dalai Lama away [to India].   

**Q:**  So regarding all this I'm sure Phala Drönyerchemmo and all knew about this.   

**A:**  Yes he knew we had this [plan] in our thoughts and there was also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla [who knew]. We said that the Dalai Lama was coming to Chönkorgye and that we have to try to bring him out at that time, because we just cannot bear to have him in Chinese hands. So we are going to get things ready and when the time comes, you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> also find the means. In 1957 when I went to deliver the taxes to Lhasa (Tib. ünbü [Tib. དབུས་འབུལ]) Kungö Tseja Gyentsenla and I had a talk. So this was in 1957-58 right. We discussed this and thought about having better persons, ones who were not running dogs of the Chinese and ones who could think, to serve as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> in the southern areas. So I asked if he could arrange to have cannons from the Potala sent via coracles through the river [to us]. He replied, "Oh, I can't do that, but, anyway I will speak with Kungö Chemmo." So he was not able to send any arms, but we were prepared from the beginning.   

**Q:**  Where was Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla going, to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  No. He was the Drönyerchemmo's main sidekick (aptru) and stayed there [Lhasa]. Finally, at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, Gyentsenla and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> Tema Jokpa Lobsang Nyendra [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོག་པ་བློ་བཟང་སྙན་གྲགས] shot each other [committed suicide]. You know, Kungö [Laja] Tempala [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལགས[, the one who has come here [ཏོ་ཨིནདིཨ]. He saw them. They were soaking some blessed pills in a ladle and were sort of in a hurry and said, "Now don't come around here. It's not good, you know". So they had soaked the blessed pills in a ladle, drank it and they shot each other at the count of three so as to not allow themselves to land in Chinese hands.   

**Q:**  So where did you meet <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla?   

**A:**  I came to Lhasa to deliver the 1957 taxes. So at that time I spoke to Kungö about this talk (see above). So Kungö and Chemmo had their own organisation and connections and they discussed it. I said that if you can send arms, then send them quietly because we are thinking of starting a militia organisation. So even at that time, we had thoughts of starting a militia organisation. So he said that if you can start one, then it is good. We discussed this at that time. Kungö was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and he was among the elder <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> heads and I had stayed at Norbulinga for a year or two as a staff officer [Tib. ལེཇ] in that office. He used to treat me very well and I had faith in him. So we served the government faithfully. We didn't do bad things like using the government property [for ourselves].   

**Q:**  So at that time, Kungö was working as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a>, right?   

**A:**  He was the contact man for Chemmo, if you did not meet Chemmo. In Lhasa, Tema Jokala used to go to Lhasa and sound out things. There was also Depön Tashi Berala [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] in this organisation. Then also Namseling.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> mention this in his book?   

**A:**  No, he did not say clearly. He said he had contacts with Chemmo. There was very little in it about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> leaving Lhasa.   

