# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0022.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1913  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ] was a clerk in the Tseja Treasury Office and then became the dzongpön of Lhapsö [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ] Dzong in Dakpo. In this interview, he discusses how in 1953 he went to Chamdo as the tax collector for the Tseja Office to collect the butter taxes. He also talks about his successful trading work bringing Indian goods to Chamdo. He provides firsthand details on going to Yadong in the second reception delegation to welcome the Dalai Lama when he came back from India after the Buddha Jayanti in 1957. He also talks in general about when Zhou Enlai met the Dalai Lama and how the democratic reforms were postponed. He finally discusses how a local militia was organized in Southern Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0022_01/H_0022_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Suppose you start in 1950. Where were you?   

**A:**  In 1950 I was in Lhasa. I think I was 37 years old. In the 1st month of the Tibetan year I requested the post of candidate for a clerk position and I became a clerk or chagnang in the Tseja Legung {Office).   

**Q:**  During this time, what news did you hear about the Chinese coming, etc.?   

**A:**  At that time it was the Tibetan Iron-Tiger Year [Tib. ལྕགས་སྟག] year and there was a lot of apprehension and tension that the Chinese were invading. And the government was patrolling the border. Lhalu was the Doji and then Ngabö was sent down [to Chamdo] as the new Doji. Since so many years have past, I can't tell you in detail, but I think it was in the 7th month of the Tibetan year. It was around the time of the opera festival [Tib. shotön]. During that time, it was said that the Chinese invaded Chamdo and it was lost and so everyone was very worried. I was working as a clerk in the Tseja Office. Since Chamdo was lost in the 8th month and there was a disturbance, I went to visit my relatives in my birth place in Nyemo. I was born in Nyemo, at Nyemo Thön. It was during this time that the Regent Taktra - I can't be sure about the details - but probably the deities Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] and Nechung were told to go into trance in the Dalai Lama's living room [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་སྤྱན་འདྲེན]. I think it was the 8th or 9th month. It is said that Gadong prostrated and offered the mandala representing the body, speech and mind [Tib. མན་དལ་རྟེན་གསུམ] and said that if the Dalai Lama does not take over the reins of the government religion and politics, Buddhism and the political system will become like a lamp in which the oil has run out [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཆབ་སྲིད་སྣུམ་ཟད་ཀྱི་མར་མེ] and he can't be responsible. I was not there, but that is what I heard. So in this way, the regent Taktra had no choice but to hand over the religious and political reins of the government. Then in the 10th month I think the Dalai Lama took over the reins of the government. I was in Nyemo for three days for a vacation. It seems the Tseja was thinking of sending me to Yadong as a staff member. Since I had taken the vacation, this was not possible. The Dalai Lama now was given the government reins and so that's what happened in 1950. Then the Dalai Lama was in Yadong and I returned to Lhasa as a clerk in the Tseja.   

**Q:**  When you were at Nyemo was there talk about the Chinese coming, etc?   

**A:**  Chamdo was invaded and the Dalai Lama took over the reins of the government. So the Dalai Lama left and Taktse [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར] Rimpoche came from Kumbum [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ] and he informed the Dalai Lama about what the Chinese had in mind. That is what was said.   

**Q:**  In 1951, the 17-Point Agreement was signed right?   

**A:**  In 1951 representatives were sent and later the Dalai Lama back came from Yadong. It is mentioned in the Dalai Lama's book that the Chinese said they wanted to have the 17-Point Agreement and Ngabö discussed it at Chamdo. Now I was not there, so that is just what is said. It is said that the Chinese Commander who militarily liberated Chamdo was Wang Qimei. Ngabö discussed things with him and there were some talks about an Agreement.   

**Q:**  In 1951 the Chinese were just coming and [question not finished]   

**A:**  From India representative Zhang Jingwu and Alo Buzhang came to the [Tibetan government's] travelling capital [Tib. བྱེས་རྒྱལ་ས] in Yadong. They met the Dalai Lama and then they went to Lhasa. I think it was in the 8-9th month. Then gradually the Chinese soldiers came from Chamdo. When they came, people said now its disastrous [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་སོང]. Because of these lousy Chinese, what is going to happen to our Buddhist faith and the life, safety and deeds of the Dalai Lama and the Three Great Monasteries [Tib. སེནདྲེགསུམ]? So the all people were very concerned. The moment they saw the Chinese they were thinking it was inauspicious and it was something that brings bad luck [Tib. རྣམ་རྟོག་ཟ]. It must have been in 1952 or 1953 when the Chinese came. The people spat on them and said, "The lousy guys who brings bad omens" [Tib. ལྟས་ངན] have come. We clapped because it was considered bad to clap. They thought that we were happy [welcoming them] since we clapped. We Tibetans sort of considered it bad, saying "May they be destroyed into dust." [Tib. ཐལ་བའི་རྡུལ་དུ་རློག་པ་ཤོག]. At that time, they [the Chinese] were very diplomatic and were showing their peaceful demeanor. They said that Tibetans and Chinese are brothers and that Tibet has fallen behind and we have come to help. After we have helped you, then even if you ask us to stay, we will not. And the soldiers were told that they were not allowed to take even a thread and a needle. So they were coming so diplomatically and putting up with all sorts of things. However, the Tibetans did not like them. I wouldn't know what they were doing in Kham, but at Lhasa everyone was frightened and considering them as an ill omen.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was at Yadong there was one side saying that the Dalai Lama should go to India and another saying that he should come to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that is what is said, but I was not at Yadong.   

**Q:**  So when the Chinese first came, you were at Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  When I came to Lhasa, Zhang Jingwu had already arrived at Lhasa. I was at Nyemo. And then they gradually arrived.   

**Q:**  When did the first People's Association arise.   

**A:**  Yes, some People's Association representatives had arisen. I think it was in 1952-53.   

**Q:**  Then you were in Lhasa most of the time?   

**A:**  In 1953, I went to Chamdo as the tax collector (Tib. drichu sersüba [འབྲི་ཆུ་གསེར་བསུས་པ]) also known as Drichu Serkha [Tib. གསེར་ཁ] of the Tseja Office. In the place where the monastery called Sogtsendengön [Tib. སོག་ཙན་དན་དགོན] was located and around Sog Dzong there were three places called Rikarsogsum [Tib. རི་དཀར་སོག་གསུམ], i.e., Sogdzong [Tib. སོག་རྫོང], Richu [Tib. རི་ཆུ] and Jungba [Tib. གཅུང་པ]. There was also Rongbo Gyerabthang [Tib. རོང་པོ་རྒྱལ་རབ་ཐང] where there was the area of the 2 dingpön of Rongpo and the 2 dingpön of Jungba. From this area the Tseja Office collected about 250 loads of butter which amounted to around 2-3000 khe of butter. I went to collect the taxes in these areas. We collected the butter and in return we gave them woolen woven material [Tib. སྣམ་བུ] and tea leaves. We went from Tengchen [Tib. སྟེང་ཆེན] all the way to Chamdo. From Khyungpo Tengchen one does not go straight, but via Doshötramoling [Tib. མདོ་ཤོད་ཁྲ་མོ་གླིང] and Riwoche [Tib. རི་བོ་ཆེ] and then to Chamdo. At Chamdo there was the Gora Bridge. In this area, the yellow paint used in Tibet called babla [Tib. བབ་ལ] was found. One could extract it from the ridges. The miser of Gorog gathered about 10 "weighing khe" [Tib. འདེགས་ཁེ] which was about 40 kilograms. So we got about 25 boxes of this. At Chamdo, we didn't have to collect taxes but we did trading. From Dzayul [Tib. རྫ་ཡུལ] there was a tea called dzaja [Tib. རྫ་ཇ]. It was from a stringy stick which produced a good extract - from Dzayul you know there was tea from the area under the Dzayul Shengo. So tea was collected as well as other items. I went down there in 1953 and returned in 1954 in the 2nd or 3rd Tibetan month. In 1954, when I was coming up, the Dalai Lama was going down [to Beijing]. I think it was 1954, but now I don't remember. He went for the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཚོགས་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  Yes, it was 1954.   

**A:**  Then he [the Dalai Lama] returned in 1955. When the Dalai Lama went down I had already arrived and so I went to the Lhadong Shenka [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ], a ferry site on the Lhasa river to accompany [Tib. ཆིབས་ཞབས] the Dalai Lama. Before the procession, the 4 younger clerks of the Tseja office had to go to the Tseja Gyabchag [Tib. རྒྱབ་ཕྱག྄]. We use the Wanga [Tib. དབང་སྒ] saddle and the leather saddlery [Tib. ཟར] and tassels for the horses, and we wore a satin chupa called serma [Tib. གསེར་མ]. We also took a square cloth in which a seal or something was wrapped. It was called Tseja Gyambog [Tib. རྒྱབ་འབོག]. So when the Dalai Lama was passing by, all the people in Lhasa were so worried because he was going to China. They thought the Chinese would harm him, so when the Dalai Lama entered the coracle with a yellow banner overhead, the soldiers were lined up at the river bank as there was urgent [fear] that people were going to jump into the water. It is said that an old lady jumped in the water and everybody was crying and saying prayers like, "Long Live the Dalai Lama and May he Return Soon." [Tib. སྐུ་ཚེ་ཞབས་པད་བརྟན་པ་དང་མགྱོགས་མྱུར་ཞབས་སོར་འཁོད་པ་ཤོག] At that time, the Chinese had come to Lhasa and had become very powerful.   

**Q:**  When you were at Chamdo, the Chinese had already come, right? So [after that] whether from the perspective of trade or the collection of taxes, were there any changes?   

**A:**  Since the Chinese had arrived, one should actually speak about not being able to collect the taxes any more, but at Sog we got the most butter because it had the largest number of miser. From Sog itself we got about 1,000 khe of butter. From Rongpo about 800 [khe] and from Jungpo about 700 [khe]. At Sog there was an old man called the Sog Dharma Dingpön. He was a good man. Since the Chinese had come and the miser had changed, he thought that the Tseja Office would not be able to collect the taxes. In the early documents, the taxes were collected on the basis of counting the number of animal by heads [Tib. སེམས་ཅན་མགོ་རྩིས]. So some of the miser, even if they had 1,000 animals in the document, they did not actually even have one hoof, and the ones who didn't have a single animal, these days they had 5-600 animals [in the document], so it was difficult to collect the taxes. The Chinese wanted the butter to be sold [Tib. སྤུས་མ] and since they came often it was difficult. So he said he is going to count the actual number of animals (animal heads) [not go according to the old documents] and so because of this, I was able to collect the "butter" easily. Aside from that, my butter collection was done according to the document which had the Dalai Lama's seal (Tib. བུགདམ་ལགཙ [སྦུག་དམ་ལག་རྩ]). The document read, "This tax collector is sent to collect the butter for the offering to the Buddha's statue in the Jokhang and to all the statues, scriptures and stupas there, and for offerings for the monks in the three great monasteries [Tib. jo shag yid bzhin nor bus mtshon pa'i rten gsum khag gi mchod rgyun dang ser 'bras dge gsum gyis mtshon pa'i dben dge 'dun khag gi bsnyn bkur gyi ched du 'bri chu gser bdus pa ched rdzong byas pa yin]. For this reason, when the miser said that they were going to give the butter for the Drichu Serduba, they were so full of religious faith that they put butter decorations and khata on the scales. On that day, we gave to the miser two bundles of incense and one khata subshi [Tib. ཟུབ་ཕྱི] scarf and a set of woolen material with the spots design that was used for the Khamba boots. We had to give these gifts no matter how big and small the butter was that was given. Then there was also tea and rice and they got thukpa and tea and droma dresi. When we, the Drichu Serdupa, came to collect butter a "throne/dais" was set for us and we sat on it. The servants called nébo [Tib. སྣེ་པོ], who were actually guides, and a dingpön would collect the butter and I sat on the dais and made notes. The miser were so happy that in two days we collected 7,000 khe. Some were collecting while others were stitching the leather for packing the butter. So I had no problems with taxes. When I went, it was very good. Likewise in the Jungpa area, although the miser were scattered and it took some time, otherwise things went well. Then in the Khyungpo area, I could not find corvée horses and pack animals so I had some difficulty and I had to pay for the transportation. At Tengchen, there was a military commander by the name of Wang Siling [not the person who won at Chamdo]. He was the military governor [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པ] of all the nomadic groups [Tib. ཧོར་ཚོ]. The Chinese were acting tactfully [Tib. མཁས་པོ].   

**Q:**  Later, was anything said about problems collecting the taxes, or   

**A:**  No nothing. Then from down here there was a problem in getting the horse corvée and the corvée pack animal transportation. One bad thing was that at Sog, the dzong and the Tsasho were all Chinese. He told me that I have to pay custom taxes [Tib. ཤོ་ཁྲལ] for my loads. I said, "You guys said that you have come to help, and this land is ours. The things I have are not my private property, but it belongs to the Tibetan government. So what are you Chinese saying about collecting taxes from the Tibetan government on Tibetan soil? I am not going to pay this." Then he said he is not going to let me through. So I said, "The question of not letting me through does not arise. The Tibetans and the Chinese have made signed the Agreement. If you really think that you can stop me then please give me a letter and then I will consult [the government]." He said that he wont give that, but will only talk from the mouth. So he was making trouble. So I said that this will not do at all and I can not pay it and so you do whatever you want. So when we were arguing there was the Sog Dzongpön who was an old man. He said that he had been a Guomindang officer. His name was Gung Daibiao. He said, "Don't argue, I will try to intercede. If you argue, he is a military leader and so you will not achieve your objective because he will suppress you with his strength. You should settle the matter at Tengchen since it was said that Wang Siling was very diplomatic. If you want to make a list, then let him make a list and then settle the matter down there and I will talk." So he discussed this and I made a list, but I said that I will not pay the taxes. He said, "Whether to pay the taxes or not, you send a wireless to Wang Siling at Tengchen. So it was when he did and said that when he comes down he will talk. After he interceded, he cooled off somewhat. So before I left the two gave me a meal. Call it a meal, it was dog meat. He was saying that he couldn't find any red dogs so it seems that he had already fed us dog meat. So I went to Tengchen and he had a Baba girl as the interpreter. It is said that he quietly lives with her. There was the Tengchen guide, the Nébo, and he said that it would be good to take her and give her some gift. So with him I gave her a peacock brand soap, a sweet smelling Indian soap, some inflatable rubber pillows and told her to come as the interpreter. Then we gave him a present and he said that he is not allowed to accept presents. So I said this is my private gift and not the government's and I am gladly giving them to you. So I gave him a peacock brand soap and cigarette number 500 [probably State Express London 555]. So he was happy and so I related the situation. He said, "That guy just did not understand that the Tibetan government's trader on Tibetan soil does not have to pay taxes." He was being very diplomatic. He said, "When he comes for a meeting I will give him the order saying that he is not allowed to do that. It will be difficult for the horse corvée and pack transportation since there are no dzong and estates in this area. So should I give you a "service certificate" [Tib. ཞབས་འདེགས་ལག་ཁྱེར]." I said thank you since in your Chinese territory we don't have ours, it would be good to have something to show. If possible if you could telephone them saying that I am coming and do as was done traditionally to the Drichu Serkha and whatever has to be done the miser will know about it." He gave this order. He had an edict from the Dalai Lama and since he was diplomatic he had it tied with three different "maroon" color silks and hung it above his door . It was all false right? So he got up and showed respect and said, "Here, this is the Dalai Lama's edict and he gave me a gold Rolex watch with a gold band". So he asked me to read this. It read, "Wang Siling, after the [13th] Dalai Lama passed away, our people in the dzong or estates whatever. The miser have had a lot of difficulties, however after you came, you looked after the miser and things are very good. So thank you and please continue to further look after the miser. Regarding the bad harvest and maggots and eroded pastures, this is the result of hunting and fishing in the abode of spirits. Don't allow this to happen and continue the traditional protection [rituals probably] well. We will meet later." So that's what was said. So he was showing us that he was very happy, that liar. He said, "It would be wonderful if you stay here as a school teacher at Tengchen." I said that as a trader of the Tibetan government, I have to go to work. He said that it would be very good if I came back later. So I said that I will see what would be best when I get back. So he gave me the certificate and I went to Chamdo. Up to Chamdo I did not have much trouble, and I gave presents to the leaders. At Chamdo I got tea and the yellow paint called babla and at Khyungpo Serta Khanagthang [Tib. ?] I got about 25 khe of wild sweet potatoes used for the Drungja and the Dalai Lama's residence. I wrapped a few loads of it in leather. So I came to India in 1955 before the Dalai Lama went to India.   

**Q:**  Regarding the horse corvée and the pack animal corvée, after the Chinese came since they had paid a lot for transportation, did this affect the traditional (corvée) system?   

**A:**  Yes. In the past, there were not that many taxes, but I had a large allotment of corvée horse and pack animals. However, after we began the reform office, which was called the Legjö Jitso [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་སྤྱི་ཚོགས], my transportation corvée allotment was cut in half. Still I did not have to pay too much in transportation fees. At first, when I went down from Khyungpo and Padagsumdo [Tib. dpa' bdag ? gsum mdo]] to Sirisumdo one had to travel for 3-4 days. Here I had to pay about 3 dayan -- which was 15 sang or 45 sang per load. Later, at Tsambumgon [Tib. ?], there was a Chinese official, a young guy. He was such a nice man. He and some Hortsho dingpön were friendly so the transportation fee that we gave was returned and the government's fixed transportation fee [Tib. བཅད་བདལ] which was low was paid. In Nagshö [Tib. ནག་ཤོད] since I knew the chiefs, they helped me a lot. So on the trip to Chamdo and back, I managed as if it was like earlier times (laughs).   

**Q:**  During this time, had prices of things and foodstuffs increased?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa and I had Indian goods. When I was at Chamdo, at the Gamtog Drukha [Tib. སྐམ་ཐོག་གྲུ་ཁ] [ferry port], the water had risen so much so the Chinese had to send some kind of boat-like thing, right? They had wood tied together since the bridge had not been built. So since they could not send things, I got a fantastic price for my Indian flashlights and batteries, leather, inflatable rubber pillows, woollen yarn and many others things--about 300% profit. Items from China had not come and I was the only one who had brought things from Lhasa. So I had a lot of luck.   

**Q:**  Then when did you come up to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I came in 1954. In 1955 [actually 1956], the Dalai Lama went for pilgrimage to India right? The Indian Mahabodhi Buddhist Association celebrated the 2,500th Anniversary of the Buddha. Later, in 1956, I was the among the second reception team sent to Yadong. It was led by the Tseja Lamoshar [Tib. ལ་མོ་ཤར]. I was the staff officer for this tsidrung. Two clerks of the Tseja Office and one clerk from the Laja Office, and one clerk from the Shölekhung [Tib. ཞོལ་ལས་ཁུངས] were there. The overall heads of the third reception team were Kungö Ramba Teiji and Taktra Kungö Chandzö Dzasa. We went up to Yadong. Then, in 1956, the Dalai Lama returned, right [actually it was in 1957]? It was in winter. Then from Yadong we came to Gyantse. The Dalai Lama came to Yadong, Phari, Gyantse, and Shigatse. At Shigatse we had brought items from the Tseja Office. The Reform Office send with us tea and money for alms -- a few hundred thousand dotse, I think. There were two huge boxes of hundred sang notes. Then we brought specially treated gold that was used for painting the faces of statues (Tib. shesay [Tib. ཞལ་གསེར]). These were given by the Tseja and Laja offices. The rice that was provided by the Laja office was imported by the rice procurement officials [Tib. འབྲས་སྒྲུབ་པ] in Phari and Tingkyey [Tib. གཏིང་སྐྱེས]. Then the various monasteries were provide with food and offerings [Tib. བསྙེན་བཀུར] Then in the same year, around 1956-57, I returned to Lhasa before the Dalai Lama arrived.   

**Q:**  Around this time, the Dalai Lama was supposed to go [to India] and then something didn't work out, right?   

**A:**  At first it is said that the Dalai Lama was invited and then for some reason the Chinese prevented it and Trijang Rimpoche was supposed go [in his place]. Then all of a sudden, it is said that Nehru called Mao or something, and so the Dalai Lama was allowed to go. Now when the Dalai Lama went to China, all the people were so worried, but when he was to go to India, everybody was just so happy. Everyone was in their best attire and they brought their flasks and tiffins. One had to go accompanying him up to Gyetseluding [Tib. སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ཀླུ་ལྡིང]. All the Lhasans went singing songs and opera songs. On the way to Kyangthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ག] and Gyetseluding there were nice parks, so people sat there and drank chang and sang songs. So the people were overjoyed since the Dalai Lama was going to India. Later, the Dalai Lama returned and the Chinese came to receive him at Gyetseluding. The one who started the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region came along with his subordinates.   

**Q:**  Then in 1957, the Dalai Lama returned and [question not finished]   

**A:**  He went in 1955 and returned in 1956.   

**Q:**  He went in 1956 and returned in 1957.   

**A:**  Was it 57? I don't remember. In 55 in August or September, he left and in 56 I think he left. It must have been March or April in 56. [dates mixed up]. The New Year was celebrated in Gyantse and in March or April he came to Shigatse [in 1957]. Something like that.   

**Q:**  During this time in India, there were a lot of talk that the democratic reforms were to be postponed. After this, when the Dalai Lama returned, whether it was Chinese offices in Lhasa or workers, were they reduced? There was talk that they were recalled or something.   

**A:**  At that time, there was some urgency and it was said that they were going to do democratic reforms. Then the Dalai Lama went to India and it was said that he would not return and I don't know the details, but Zhou Enlai came to India and in the Kham area the Chinese were being very diplomatic [Tib. མཁས་པོ] and said that they have come to help. But they destroyed the monasteries and the people and there was a lot of talk like that. And at Delhi, I think he [Zhou] met the Dalai Lama and it is said that Ngabö confirmed all that face-to -face [Tib. ར་སྤྲག་བཏང]. So he said that if the Dalai Lama does not return, then there will be a lot of commotion in Lhasa. That as far as the democratic reforms are concerned, that there was no urgency to do that and it can wait until the time is right. It is mentioned in the Dalai Lama book that he made a lot of promises that were not kept. Whatever sweet talk was given, anyway, unless the Dalai Lama returned it was lost to them, right? So for this reason they said that he must return. Then those who were in Tibet, like Kungö Kalön Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] and Thubden Ramyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས] and Kungö Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] who was the Foreign Minister [Tib. ཕྱི་སྲིད] and the three great monasteries went and met the Chinese leaders. And it was said that it doesn't matter and that if the miser do not agree then [the reforms] can be postponed. Kungö Liushar said if this can be extended, then its good because the people won't get agitated and there will not be any commotion and it would be like the proverb, "If the fire gets extinguished naturally, the smoke will disappear." [Tib. མེ་རང་ཤི་དུ་བ་རང་ཡལ]. So the Chinese asked what that proverb meant. It meant that there is about to be chaos [Tib. zing chang) and so if this is stopped then there is no need for this talk to arise. It will quiet down by itself. So there is such a story.   

**Q:**  This question of reforms, when did it arise?   

**A:**  [They said] One has to do reforms because it is socialist and democratic and it is in the Chinese constitution. At first, they were saying that the reforms would only be done later. They put that in the 17-Point Agreement. Actually the Chinese drummed up the matter. They said it has to be done and made a lot of propaganda. And some Chinese running dogs said that it must be done. The people were not making a move, but the running dogs were pushing the matter. There were Tibetans who had no money and the Chinese looked after the beggars and similar people, and used them.   

**Q:**  What were they doing to them?   

**A:**  They taught them to say that reforms have to be made. That they can't pay the taxes; that they are having a difficult time; that they can't have a slave system. So they taught them to say that. The people were not saying that, but their representatives agitated the matter. There would always be bad elements, right?   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese cadres going to the villages and teaching them these things.   

**A:**  Yes. They made them study this and advised them. Like in a court case, they drummed up the people and even though it was not the people, they pretended that it was the people. They taught them for two-three months and then made them speak at meetings. Actually, the people were very hard-headed and would not say alright.   

**Q:**  What kind of teaching were they giving them?   

**A:**  That the reforms have to be made soon. That one must be united under the Chinese government [Ch. zhongyang]. That the slave system [Tib. ཚེ་གཡོག་རིང་ལུགས] and its taxes and laws are not acceptable. So the Chinese made these points, taught them and made them say it. They told the people to say it, but they were not saying it. The people were against this. Since they were against this, the Chinese were not able to do the reforms.   

**Q:**  Then in 1957, 58, 59, where were you?   

**A:**  In 1957, I was in the Tseja Office, but actually I was working on building the Dalai Lama's new palace that was called Takten Mingyur Phodrang [Tib. རྟག་བརྟན་མི་འགྱུར་ཕོ་བྲང]. The Laja and Tseja Offices together had to make many religious decorations [Tib. མཆོད་རྫས] and the door curtains in the Dalai Lama's room. So I was in charge of this. I was at Norbulinga where the Tseja Office had made a separate office called Trede Office. Then in 1957, I was send as the head of Dakpo Lhapsö Dzong [Tib. དྭགས་པོ་ལྷ་གསོལ་རྫོང]. My colleague there was another clerk called Lobsang Phüntso [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཕུན་ཚོགས]. So we took over the dzong after it became was managed by the government [Tib. ཤུངཛིན [གཞུང་འཛིན]) [note: he means when it came back under the direct control of the government due to the Tibetan government's reform called shungdzin]   

**Q:**  So this was in 1957, right..   

**A:**  In 1957, in about the 4th Tibetan month, I went to Dakpo.   

**Q:**  So by that time the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region had begun right?   

**A:**  Yes, it had, but the "Tibetan power" remained in the hands of the Tibetans up to 1959. And no matter how hard they tried to change that, the Chinese could not. Even at Lhapsö dzong they started a lot of committees [Ch. wei yuan; Tib. ལས་ཁུངས] and offices, but we continued our jurisdiction and tax collections. Even at Gyatsa [Tib. རྒྱ་ཚ] County, where they [the Chinese] had a larger office, they could not start much. In our area, they could not start anything because in the southern areas the Khambas had arrived. I forgot something -- on the southern side of the Tsangpo river the Chinese were not able to establish any offices. Lhapsö is on the south side of the river. So on the south side of the river, except for at Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] where there was the Gangbu [Ch. gang bu], a huge Chinese office with tunnels, there were no Chinese offices in any of the other dzong. Earlier there were, but when the Khambas came to the south, all the smaller offices in Tsetang, Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] and Jedeshöl [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ] were removed. Tsetang was there. It was referred to as Tsetang Gangbu and there were tunnels [Tib. ས་སྦུག]. At Dakpo, on the other side at Gyatsa, some Chinese came to propagandize at some times, but not usually.   

**Q:**  And so at Lhapsö you were there in 1957, 1958, and up to the uprising, right?   

**A:**  We collected the 1957 taxes. In the 4th month of 1958 the Dalai Lama took his gelong vows and he became a gelong. All the donggo obligations for this had to be provided by Tseja Office. At Lhapsö, I don't know how many khe of butter [were collected], but there were 40 loads. We didn't get that much from taxes, only about 20 loads, so we exchanged grain [we collected] for butter and sent about 48 loads of butter to Ganden monastery [where the Dalai Lama was]. In 1958, we discussed that if the Chinese do like this and since in Lhoka there were so many Khamba of Chushigandru, so we in the southern dzongs had to feed them because they couldn’t buy or rent land. So we had to give them food and animals. And so we said that it is only a question of how much they could eat, so if we could get together, we could form a voluntary militia that would be good. Then if their stewards and our dzong's stewards were sent together, then the miser would have to provide less and there would be better protection for our country. So in the 7th month of 1957 [really 1958], the 28 dzongs of southern Tibet (from Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] down to Gyemthong [Tib. སྐྱེམ་མཐོང]) each appointed a representative. So did Kongpo, but they did not come up [to Lhüntse]. So in the 8th month of 1958 we met at Lhüntse Dzong. Since we could not force the miser, we formed a volunteer militia force [Tib. དང་བླངས་དམག་མི]. Our soldiers formed a regiment and the stewards were to be sent jointly as our representative. [Note: there is a clearer explanation in the subject's 2nd and 3rd interviews] At this time, the government sent Tsipön Namseling and Trekhang [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] Kungö Khenjung Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] and it seems there were some abbots from Sera and Drepung, but they were not there.   

**Q:**  So Tsipön Namseling and Khenjung Samjola were in Lhoka, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were, and so we had a meeting at Yügye [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ] Lhüntse Dzong and discussed this. The two Southern Governors [Tib. ལྷོཇི]-- who were Tshador [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར] Khenjung and Jorgye [Tib. འབྱོར་རྒྱས] were also consulted. So we agreed to form a voluntary militia force and in the 10th month of the Tibetan year, at Yarlung, the militias were to come together. So the kungös were consulted. So in the 10th month of 1958 the [representatives of the] dzongs and the estates in Dakpo and Kongpo came. Though Lhapsö was a small dzong, we had [recruited] 500 soldiers. I had boys from "better off" [Tib. མི་དྲག] families who came as my "sidekicks" [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག]. There were 36 of them. So in the 10th month we came to Yarlung, to the military regiment. All the dzongs and estates came and all together we had about 9,800, not quite 10,000. The better off and the tsodrag people numbered about 1,500 members. So we stayed like this at Yarlung. Then in 1959, the uprising took place and the Dalai Lama came via Lhoka, right? At that time, I collected the taxes of the Kongpo area's dzongs. There is a place called Wöka Ngagungla [Tib. 'ol dga' snga gung ? la] and via E it goes to the Lukangdru [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་དྲུ] ferry site. So I did not send the taxes [to Lhasa but] stored them at Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་གྱ་རི]. I, our village tsodrag and 20 odd soldiers, were sent to Lhagyari. I did not send the taxes to Lhasa but stored them at Lhagyari. Our [Lhapsö] taxes was also stored at Lhagyari. Then the Dalai Lama went to India. So that's what happened. We had formed a military regiment at Yarlung Phodrang [Tib. ཡར་ཀླུང་ཕོ་བྲང]. Then Kungö Namseling said to us, "There are about 1,500 tsodrag here and the Dalai Lama has left. If we keep these [better] people who can think [i.e., leaders] there will be no one to look after the various regions so let them all return. You have to stay here." At Lhüntse Dzong an independent Tibetan government [Tib. བོད་རང་བཙན་གྱི་གཞུང] was formed and Kungö Kundeling and Andru Dzasa were the Prime Ministers [Tib. སིཙབ]. But the two of them went as the Dalai Lama's entourage [to exile in India]. Later Kungö Samjola and Namseling became the heads of both the civil and military sections of independent Tibet [Tib. བོད་རང་བཙན་ཞི་དྲག་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]. So we were at Yarlung and together with the Chushigandru we started a Military Headquarters called "the Headquarter set up according to the order [of the Dalai Lama]" [Tib. བཀའ་འབྲེལ་དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང]. I was told that I cannot leave and that I must be the secretary [Tib. དམག་དྲུང) of the Military headquarters and that I should choose from the dzongpön whoever I wanted as my colleague. Then they had a meeting and my colleague was the lay official Jogpe [Tib. ལྕོག་སྤེ]. The two of us became Magji and also Tsondzin [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་དང་གཙོ་འཛིན་གཅིག་ལྕོག] of the 9,000 odd militia soldiers of the 28 dzong of the southern area, and they [the others] were send back [the 1,500 tsodrag]. If they were not sent back, they would have made it out with me [to India], right? Then one day when the Chinese started firing, we went through the motions of fighting, but there was no way of managing them [the PLA]. The shells were coming down like rainfall. However, we kept on fighting that morning. Our soldiers, there were soldiers from the Trapchi, Bodyguard and Artillery [Tibetan government] Regiments. In Trandrug [Tib. ཁྲ་འབྲུག] there was a place called Shadrag, the place where the water had made a mound. The Chinese piled up ammunitions like a mountain and fired cannons at our place so it became unbearable. There was an estate of Langchunga [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ] there so I went there taking a nice gun called Pamali. I had gotten separated from my servant so I was alone. Together with me was the [Chushigandru] group of Baba Yeshe [Tib. འབའ་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས]. He was saying, "Don't go, don't go". I went along the canal and began shooting at the ammunition dump. That didn't help. When I was there, the Chinese fired a mortar just ahead of me and then one behind and so unless I quickly left they would have found the range. We were on the east hill and our soldiers went towards a hill over there. We knew that it was our [Tibetan government] soldiers because they wore yellow chupa. The Chinese shelled them and did not allow them to advance. Since they were trained troops- you know there is a way of lying down and moving [crawling]. They advanced that way and about 10 soldiers, as soon as they reached the hill, ran up firing their 303 English Carbines nine times at one once. The ammunition dump fell on the cannon and it exploded and the whole country was filled with smoke. Earlier, the Chinese soldiers just filled the hill like sheep and goats grazing. The place was filled with yellowish soldiers and it was amazing. When the ammunition dump exploded there was not one [soldier] around. Then since we lost the Phodrang [at Lhüntse], we went to the Halogang [Tib. ཧ་ལོ་སྒང] estate. It was just passed noon and we ate. Gen Yeshi and the Chushigandru Tsondzin [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན] were there. I was acting as their secretary. Then while we were distributing ammunition and making a list of the extra ammunition, it was said that the Chinese were coming. They shelled us and hit the walls and the upper part of the house was blown off. They [the Khambas] ran away and I came later. I tried to ride the horse in the courtyard, but it was bucking and would not stand still. Then I stood on the trough [to mount it] and mounted the horse but the knot tying the reins would not come loose so I could not unleash the reins so I cut it with a knife I wore at mu waist. When I began to ride there was no way to go. A shell landed right in the middle of the courtyard. The whole earth started shaking and a cloud of dust from the sand rose up. The shell had landed with a thud, but it did not explode. So I immediately rode down to where there was a house below that had also been destroyed. Gen Yeshe and the others were there. He was shouting at me, "What the hell are you doing, aren't you coming!" I had no servant and I had to pack the documents. So from the house below that was hit by a shell, I raced on. I managed to get away from there and then at E Chundogang [Tib. ཨེ་ཆུ་མདོ་སྒང] I stayed for a day. Then for another day I stayed at Chödewog [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་འོག] and then at Chödegong [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་གོང]. After the explosion of the ammunition dump, there were no soldiers coming after us. Then I went to Yarlung and managed flee to exile in India.   

**Q:**  So that's all for today.   

