# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0006.07 : Tape 7
					(Reinterview)  
##  : with Wangchuk Dorje [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Sogang Xiang, Panam County, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 4 August 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Ben Jiao  
**Name:** Wangchuk Dorje [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The subject was born to a poor düjung family in the old society in Panam County (dzong) in Tsang. In this interview, he describes in detail the struggle sessions held against him and the experiences of people during the Cultural Revolution.   

---  
### Tape 7R  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0006_01/OR_0006_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Was the person who informed you about the struggle sessions related to you?   

**A:**  He was just a friend.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He said they are going to hold struggle sessions against you. I told him, "I don't care whatever struggle session they hold. I don't have any regrets even if I will be killed." At that time, I was not worried about that at all. Phüntso, who was then the director [ch. ju zhang] of the Public Security Bureau [tib. གོང་ཨན་ཇུ] in Panam County was related to me as a first cousin. He also went through the motions of saying that I had spread poisonous rumors among the masses. I said, "I have never insulted the CCP and caused hindrances [tib. བཀག་འགོག] to the masses' production. But if I have done something like that please tell me clearly that I have told this and that to this and that person. I was doing every thing very carefully and I have never said something bad." He said, "According to the Communist Party policy, we can't make the people prove it face-to-face [tib. ར་སྤྲག] whether you have done that. You should confess and if you haven't done that, you should be alert."   

**Q:**  When your family members heard that they were going to hold the struggle session against you, what did they say? Did they say now it is finished [tib. དཔེ་བསགས] and were they scared?   

**A:**  When I heard about that, I didn't tell my family members, even including my wife who died two years ago.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you tell them?   

**A:**  I thought they would be worried about it and [I would] feel sorry about that if I told them.   

**Q:**  Did some of your friends come to your house and tell you that they had made false accusation and told lies?   

**A:**  Yes, there were many people saying that. But, I told them, "You don't say anything about that." As for me, I told them about what I had done and what I didn't do. But they were still insisting on making false accusations, so it would be useless to tell anything to them. The Work Team motivated the people in this village to hold a struggle session against me. When some people didn't hold a struggle session against me, they scolded them very severely, saying that they are the same as OR.0006 and that their brains and blood have mixed together [have the same thoughts].   

**Q:**  When they held the struggle session against you, did they make you bend your body down like other people?   

**A:**  Yes, they made me bend my body down, but I didn't bend down very much. Nobody beat me up severely. I just had to bend my body down because that was a policy of the CCP.   

**Q:**  Did you keep quiet or did you answer them?   

**A:**  I answered them a little bit. I confessed about my sexual misconduct and the way I talked about collecting the Donation Grain and the Selling Grain from the ngadag.   

**Q:**  How did that sexual misconduct happen?   

**A:**  Although I had my wife, I had some sexual misconduct with some outsiders. At that time, we were not allowed to do that and they were taking doing that very seriously. And they also said that I had raped a woman and that was very serious. I said, "I didn't rape her. When I was passing the alley, she called me over to drink tea." I said, "I am not coming to drink tea. Is your husband home? If he is out, then I will come." She said, "He is out, come on in." Then I went in and I had sexual misconduct. That was an act of violating the law of the CCP. Otherwise, I didn't say that "I am pebble in the water and the Work Team is like flowing water." Then some people said, "You sang a song with the words, 'After refuting OR.0006, we lost the pasture in the upper part of the valley and the gooseberry trees in the lower part of the valley." I said, "I have never sung that song." Actually, the song was sung by the people in Maphu in Sogang. There was a very large pasture in the upper part of the valley. In the past we had divided that pasture. In the lower part of the valley near the fields, there was a large area of gooseberry trees. In the past, us and Maphu were using the pasture and using the soil together. After I was fired, the pasture on the other side of mountain was taken away. That was decided by the Ngodrub, who was then the Party Secretary of the xiang. Later he became the director [tib. ཇུ་ཞང] of the Agriculture and Husbandry Bureau [ch. nong mu ju]. All of the gooseberry tree were cut down and the land was made into fields. The county said that was a mistake and made them transport all of the gooseberry trees to the county. Therefore, they [the people in Maphu] sang the song with the words, "After criticizing OR.0006, we lost the pasture in the upper part of the valley and the gooseberry trees in the lower part of the valley. If you still refute him, we will put you in a horn." At the time when they said that I sang the song, I said, "I don't know how to sing songs and I am not a good singer, let alone singing that kind of song. I never even had the idea of singing that kind of song." They said, "You sang the song and spread the poisonous rumor for mobilizing the masses to stand up and indicated that you had made that accomplishment." I told them I didn't have the idea of doing that and singing that song. I had been doing whatever I could, like being in charge of the grain and trade for the CCP and I worked in the store for one year. I collected all of the wool in this area and delivered it to the government and the accounts were absolutely clear and I had this accomplishment. In 1960, I went to Western Tibet [tib. Tö] for building the road at the Sino-Nepalese Friendship Bridge [tib. ཀྲུང་བལ་མཛའ་གྲོགས་ཟམ་པ]. I was the Brigade Leader [ch. dui zhang] of Panam County. There were people from eleven counties: Gyantse County, Shigatse County, Rinpung [tib. རིན་སྤུངས] County, She Thongmön [tib. བཞད་མཐོང་སྨོན] County, Ngamring [tib. ངམ་རིང] County, Lhatse [tib. ལྷ་རྩེ] County and Gampa [tib. གམ་པ] County. We were holding a meeting regarding the "Bearing the Five Good Things [tib. བཟང་པོ་ལྔ་ལྡན]" and we were working in the Headquarters [tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང]. We had a flag called the "Heroic Flag." Finally, we, Panam County, got the "Heroic Flag." I said, "I am thinking that these were the accomplishments. The Heroic Flag was hung in the office of Panam County. You can check it out. I think that was an accomplishment, but that might also probably be an error." They said, "You are too impertinent [tib. ཁ་རྒྱགས་པ]. When we tell you two words, you tell us three words back."   

**Q:**  Did they tell you after the meeting that from now on you were labeled as an evil person [tib. མི་ངན]?   

**A:**  Yes, they said at the meeting, "From today on, we have labeled you as an evil man. It will be your choice whether you will be labeled for a long time or just to have it for one year or a few months. If you transform your mind well, the label will be removed quickly. If you don't transform your mind well, it won't be removed."   

**Q:**  At that point, what did you think?   

**A:**  I didn't care whether I would be labeled or not. Whether they would label me or not, I could do the farming on my little amount of land and little amount of animals, though I didn't have much. Otherwise, I was not allowed to meddle in government work whether I was labeled or not, so it didn't make a difference. But the bad thing was that when I worked in the rukhag for one year, they reduced [my points by] three hundred work points just like they did with the ngadag, saying that the "evil people" are as the same as the ngadag.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for reducing that?   

**A:**  That was just [them] using their power and bullying people. They didn't have any reason. They also reduced three hundred work points each for one person from the households called Shölpa, Jörok and Troga.   

**Q:**  Was that a big reduction?   

**A:**  According to the income in the countryside, it was a great amount. As for the people doing big works, it was a small thing.   

**Q:**  Usually, how many work points did you get in one year?   

**A:**  When people were made to work a lot, the work points would be more and when there wasn't much work, the work points were less.   

**Q:**  What was the average work points for one person in a year?   

**A:**  The highest was 2,000 work points in a year. The next was about 1500-1600. The people who were working permanently, like taking care of horses and donkeys, drivers, and shepherds were getting about 2,000 work points. The ordinary people were sometimes working for half a day in the morning and sometimes in the evening. Therefore, we didn't get many work points.   

**Q:**  Did they reduce the work points of your wife and other family members?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They reduced my work points, but it was a loss for the whole family and the livelihood was very hard.   

**Q:**  How long did the rukhag last?   

**A:**  The rukhag lasted for seven years. In the beginning, it was not so bad because people had something to eat at home. After three to four years, some people were unable to work and didn't have food to eat. At that time, the government gave about one pork tin of the Chinese beans for making soups. People didn't have chang to drink. Even if somebody had a little bit of chang, they had to drink it surreptitiously. People were told that we should oppose being "extravagant and wasteful [tib. རྒྱས་སྤྲོས་ཆུ་ཟོས]" and we should do "Increasing Production and Practicing Economizing [tib. ཐོན་སྤེལ་གྲོན་ཆུང]." They were saying that children ate too much. If you eat bag having one dowa of tsamba, it would be finished in one meal. But if you make a soup with it, it would be enough for two to three days. We didn't have bag to eat and we had to make tsamba soup. They would come to check in the house so that we didn't make thick soups. They said that if you make a thick soup you have to use a lot of tsamba so you should make thin soups.   

**Q:**  Who came to check in the houses?   

**A:**  They had appointed some poor people to check that.   

**Q:**  What was name of the title for the person going to check?   

**A:**  Her name was Drolma [tib. སྒྲོལ་མ].   

**Q:**  What was the name of that work for checking?   

**A:**  They were saying we should do the "Increasing Production and Practicing Economizing." So the masses were saying surreptitiously that the content of the meeting was "Don't eat and do [tib. མ་ཟ་བྱེད]." That means don't eat food and do work.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was during the rukhag. The rukhag had two carts pulled by three mules and two lag [20] of donkeys. They had to transport the Donation Grain and the Selling Grain every day and they also hired trucks. The ration grain was fourteen khe and in one year we had only eleven khe and fifteen dre. At that time, the yield was fixed high saying that the yield should be high because the CCP had motivated production and even the grain that the birds eat should be noted. After the threshing, they let us pick up the grain that was mixed with sand and stones when sweeping the threshing ground. This was also weighed in the yield. They did it very strictly. The state is not [to] be blamed. It was done by the people in between.   

**Q:**  Was that at the beginning of the rukhag or at the end?   

**A:**  It was at the end. People were extremely happy when the rukhag was ended.   

**Q:**  When did they remove your label?   

**A:**  I was labeled for two years and then they removed it in the third year. They also removed the label of all the ngadag and ngatsab. However, the ngadag and the ngatsab were told that they were not allowed to meddle with matters in the rukhag.   

**Q:**  What year was it that all the labels were removed? That must be after the new policy was implemented.   

**A:**  That was probably at the end of 1968.   

**Q:**  Did they remove the labels of all the people who were labeled or did they just partially remove the labels?   

**A:**  In this place, all of the labels were removed, but in some other places, they left about one person still labeled for one to two years. Those people were probably mischievous [tib. སྤྱོད་པ་ཚུབ་པ] or they [the cadres] were looking at them in a different kind of way.   

**Q:**  I heard that some people were still labeled even in 1978-80. Later, they implemented the policy and removed their labels. Did they do that in this place?   

**A:**  They didn't do that in this place. Otherwise, there were some labeled lamas in the Tashilhunpo Monastery who were labeled for a very long time.   

**Q:**  What was your thinking when you were labeled for two years? Did you feel miserable at being labeled?   

**A:**  I didn't feel very miserable. My wife used to worry about me saying, "When will they remove your label?" I told her, "Never mind, regardless of whether they remove the label or not, I have to do the same work and they will pay the work points. The only thing is that I can't meddle in matters of the government and the rukhag." I could not meddle with those matters, but what was the use of meddling in those matters? I went through the motions of saying, "Don't worry about it. I am not worried at all." Actually, it was impossible for me not to feel miserable, but I was trying to console my wife so that she might not feel very miserable.   

**Q:**  How many times did they hold struggle sessions against you?   

**A:**  They held struggle sessions about four times.   

**Q:**  Were all of those struggle sessions held for the same reason?   

**A:**  Yes, they held a struggle session in the xiang. They told me that I made a nickname. I told the late Party Secretary named Nyidrön La, [tib. ཉི་སྒྲོན་ལགས], "You are like an aluminum pot [tib. ཧ་ཡང] with water in it. When people light the fire, you make a sound 'har'. When there is no fire under you, you keep quite. When the Work Team was giving you some instructions, you were very active as if you wanted to jump somewhere. When there was no Work Team, you would just stop doing that." This was true. I really told him like that. And they also told me, "The Party Secretary and the xiang zhang don't have any power. You were appropriating their power [tib. གཞན་འགན་འཕྲོག་སྒྲུབ]."   

**Q:**  Did they say that at the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, they held a meeting in the xiang and held a struggle session. Nobody beat me up severely. They were just holding my head and pressing on my back, and they shook my body saying, "You are stubborn and you are not confessing your actions. You should confess nicely."   

**Q:**  Did the cadres hold your head or the masses?   

**A:**  Some people among the masses did that. They were made to do that. I knew about that from the beginning. There was a cadre in the place called Dzangub. In the past, he used to be an accountant in the rukhag and he was related to the Party Secretary called Chogpa [tib. མཆོག་པ]. Later he was working in the xiang. He pulled my hair on the top of my head and banged my head on the corner of the table and it was bleeding. Later, after my label was removed, he told me, "I didn't have any choice but to speak like that because the Work Team told me, 'It will not be okay if you don't do that.' I am sorry for that. Please let's keep our good relation like in the past."   

**Q:**  Did he apologize to you?   

**A:**  Yes. Later we had kind of good relations and he came to my house to do some stitching and he didn't take wages. His tailoring skill wasn't so good, but he used the sewing machine for us for three to four days in a year, and he also called me to his house to eat and drink.   

**Q:**  During the Cultural Revolution, in the Lhasa area there were two groups and they engaged in a kind of war. Was there any similar situation in this place?   

**A:**  Yes, there was. At that time, there were the two groups, Gyenlo and Nyamdre. The majority of people were in Nyamdre. There were less people in Gyenlo. I was in Gyenlo. For that, they [Nyamdre] were very angry. Actually, what happened to us was just like playing a game. I am not sure what happened in China, but in the TAR and the Panam County, they held struggle sessions against the Party Secretaries, putting paper hats on them and taking them around the streets. There was a County Party Secretary called Litumin. He was quite old. They wrote big character posters saying that we should shatter his body into pieces [tib. ཤ་འཐོར་རུས་འཐོར] and he was taken around the villages. They held struggle sessions against him about fifteen to twenty times. He was taken around Chunub, Panam and Gadong. I thought that when the high leaders had to face that kind of situation, people like us are just like underground insects. Thinking in that way, it seemed my misery also got less.   

**Q:**  What was your reason for joining the Gyenlo?   

**A:**  There was a director of the traders called Sidu-la living in Kyilkhar [tib. དཀྱིལ་མཁར]. He was a very ingenious person and he was also well educated. He used to be a xiang zhang in the past. The two of us were getting along well. He told me, "I am Gyenlo and most of the people in Zeng [?] are also Gyenlo. Justice is on the side of Gyenlo, so you should mobilize the people in this place to follow Gyenlo." I listened to him and joined Gyenlo, but I didn't mobilize the people very much. I contacted him two to three times. Finally, Nyamdre won the victory and Gyenlo kind of lost. If I talk about the situation deep inside, they [?] rebelled against Chairman Mao. In Panam County, there were two to three people of Gyenlo and the majority was Nyamdre. So the Nyamdre held a very different kind of point of view towards me and said, "You were very eloquent and you rebelled against Nyamdre and said that you were going to do a lot to the Nyamdre people, and also made many organizations." I told them, "Actually, I didn't make any organization and mobilize the people. I just joined Gyenlo."   

**Q:**  Did the two groups fight each other?   

**A:**  No, they didn't stone each other and fight each other. I heard that in the cities like Lhasa, Shigatse and Gyantse they fought a lot.   

**Q:**  Did they fight in Panam County?   

**A:**  In Panam County, there were two groups and they just pulled each other [tib. འཐེན་ཤར][argued back and forth verbally], but they didn't fight. I also didn't stone and fight with people.   

**Q:**  In 1969, the revolt in Nyemo and Biru took place. Did you hear about that?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard about that. We heard about the fighting in Lhasa and Shigatse and that they had killed three to four people, and that some people's eyeballs were shot out with slingshots and guns for killing birds. We heard such news right away.   

**Q:**  How did you hear that? Did you hear that from the radio or from the newspaper?   

**A:**  We heard from travelers. They brought us the news and it was also reported in the newspapers a little bit. We didn't have many things like radios at that time. Only a few people had radios, but they were not allowed to play them freely. They [government] had made an announcement saying if anybody listened to the American Radio, they would be sentenced to life imprisonment and their property would be confiscated.   

**Q:**  Did you hear about the revolt in Nyemo and in Biru, and about the nun Trinley Chödrön?   

**A:**  Yes, we heard about that.   

**Q:**  Did they take the nuns of Nyemo around the villages in this area?   

**A:**  They didn't take the nuns around the village very much, except for a few umdze in the nunnery. They took more monks who used to be in charge in the monasteries around the villages. At the time of the reforms, there were probably 140 monks in the Geding Monastery. The highest monks in charge of the monastery were arrested in Gyantse and they were sent to political study sessions. They received many struggle sessions. The monk monastery leaders who were like the second person in charge also had received a lot of struggle sessions. There was a monk in Maphu who was called Rimpoche. They held struggle sessions and made him suffer a lot.   

**Q:**  What did you hear about the purpose of the nun in Nyemo [for launching the revolt]?   

**A:**  Was that the nun Trinley Chödrön who came out during the Cultural Revolution?.   

**Q:**  Yes, what did you think her purpose was?   

**A:**  At that time, we were thinking that it was a political struggle between the two groups regarding who would win the political power and who would lose. But the masses were saying, "No matter who would win the victory, we are the people working hard all the time and we will get food enough to be full. We don't care who wins the victory, Gyenlo or Nyamdre. It doesn't make any difference to us."   

**Q:**  During the Cultural Revolution, did people study the quotes of Chairman Mao a lot in this area?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In this area when you met people on the way, did they tell them to recite, "the supreme instruction" [tib. ཆེས་མཐོའི་བཀའ་སློབ] and the people then had to recite a quote?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. They told people to recite the supreme instruction and asked people what group they belonged to. There was a person in Dayü who when people told him to recite the "supreme instruction" said, "I will recite the supreme instruction, but before that you should recite my 'internal instruction [tib. ནང་དོན་བཀའ་སློབ].'" So they didn't have anything to say and they just let him go. His livelihood was poor and he was a paper seller. He meant by the "internal instruction" to give him food because he didn't have food to eat.   

**Q:**  Didn't they criticize him for saying that?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. He was poor and people were just talking about that as a joke. His name was Dayü Lhagyal [tib. lza yul lha rgyal]. People were talking about him when they were drinking chang saying that that person was really tough. Instead of getting criticized, he criticized them. Sometimes, he begged for some cabbages and onions. When people didn't give him the vegetables, he would say, "If you don't give them to me, the sky will take them away one morning." He meant that the vegetables would get frost. If some rich people would have said something like that, they [cadres] would say something to them.   

**Q:**  In this place, did the people have to gather together in the morning and recite the works of Chairman Mao?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  Where did you get together?   

**A:**  Whenever they held the meeting, they would sing a song with the words, "We should study the works of Chairman Mao." And people were made to pray, "Long live the Vice Chairman Lin Biao," while holding the quotation book of Chairman Mao in their hands.   

**Q:**  Did you have to say that every morning?   

**A:**  Not really every morning, but we had to do that whenever a meeting was held. The party members might be holding some more meetings. Sometimes, meetings were held everyday and sometimes once every two to three days. After the meetings were dismissed, we were made to say, "Long live Chairman Mao and Vice Chairman Lin Biao."   

**Q:**  Did you have to say that at the time of eating food?   

**A:**  Do you mean in one's home?   

**Q:**  When you went to work and ate together, did you have to say that?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have to say that. They also set up a kind of team [tib. ཚོགས་པ] for studying the works of Chairman Mao. They named that team the "intellectual team [tib. ཤེས་ཡོན་ཅན]." That team was called to more meetings and they did a lot of things.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that a training team?   

**A:**  Probably. They had been going through the motions of training them, but there weren't any educated people to achieve a good result of getting trained. The people in the countryside couldn't get educated.   

**Q:**  When did they revive the Xiang People's Government after it had been replaced by the Revolutionary Committee for some years? How long did the Revolutionary Committee last?   

**A:**  It lasted for about one year and two months. After that, the old cadres were recruited again for the xiang and the Senior and the Junior Director for about three months. Then after that, they also left and the power was handed over to the previous Party Secretary and xiang zhang and the old cadres of the xiang. I was not among them. Now, only the clerk is still alive. Otherwise, all of them died.   

**Q:**  Who was the clerk?   

**A:**  He lives in Geding and he was the father of the Phuchung La [tib. བུ་ཆུང་ལགས] working in the bank. He was not a Party member. Only two of us are left...   

**Q:**  What is the name of the clerk?   

**A:**  His name is Patül [tib. དཔའ་བརྟུལ]. In the beginning he was the clerk in the xiang and later he was appointed as the Financial Committee Uyön [tib. ནོར་སྲིད] and the new clerk was a youngster called Tseden la [tib. ཚེ་བརྟན་ལགས]. Now, he probably is the director of the village. After our xiang was merged with the one down there , the Party Secretary also became like a village head [ch. cun zhang].   

**Q:**  How old is the clerk?   

**A:**  He is probably eighty-three years old.   

**Q:**  They set up the Red Guards, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you a Red Guard?   

**A:**  No, I wasn't. My daughter was a Red Guard. Now she is living Wangden [tib. དབང་ལྡན].   

**Q:**  In this place, what did the Red Guards do?   

**A:**  The main duty was to investigate class struggle and they searched the houses of the masses to see whether they had hidden away some things. They took away spears and small knives, and they took away a lot of things from the ngadag and ngatsab. They went around to most of the houses. They were suspicious that they might have hidden weapons and other things. They also destroyed the temples where the clay statues were kept [tib. མན་ཐང] and the small cairns on the roofs where the protector deities were kept. The Work Team from the government told them to destroy them. They said, "It would not be okay if you don't destroy them because the ngadag and ngatsab made the temples good looking outwardly, but they had put some other things like guns and swords in the temples." Those were destroyed with the prayer flags in one day and the roof was made even or flat. They also burned all the wood blocks used for printing, and the scriptures and the prayer flag poles. The Work Team also made lists of how many wood blocks, scriptures and other things that people had [that] were burned. They praised the people who had burned more of those things and told the people who had burned less that they still had things hidden somewhere. And they told the Red Guards to search their houses again, but they were unable to find anything. The Red Guards smashed the pearl and coral rosaries called karshal, marshal and sershal with stones. In the house of the ngadag Pelshar, there was a temple where the Kangyur text was kept. In that temple there was a statue of the Maitreya Buddha [tib. བྱམས་པ]. When they destroyed the statue, they found one full dongpa of pearls in the head of the statue. They smashed all the pearls in a big stone mortar and they also smashed the golden amulet [tib. གའུ] ornament and the golden earrings, and the ornament called Sogor [tib. སོག་སྒོར]. The mother of the household had a zi bead with two eyes which was as big as an egg of a grouse. That was also smashed by the Work Team themselves. Actually, those were all wrong. How could there have been such a policy?   

**Q:**  Were the masses saying that it was not good to do those things?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. They were saying what kind of harm would those things cause? If something is harmful, then they are not to be blamed. But these things won't do any harm. If they didn't leave the things with the owner, it would be beneficial to give them to the poor people. Smashing them like that was really spoiling them. People were saying like that a lot, but if they said that to the Work Team strongly, they would say that it is not correct to speak like that.   

