# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0230.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Fan Ming  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein and Anon, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Xi'an, China  
**Date of Interview:**   
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Fan Ming  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 83  
**Date of Birth:** 1910  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Fan Ming was a Major-General in the 1st field army and a senior cadre in the Northwest Bureau. He was the overall commander of the northwest cavalry troops that entered Lhasa in December 1951 under the terms of the 17-Point Agreement, and then served as a senior cadre in the Tibet Work Committee (Ch. Xizang gong wei) until his arrest, expulsion from Lhasa and imprisonment in Xi'an in 1958. He was a strong supporter of the Panchen Lama and a strong opponent of Zhang Guohua and the Tibet policy of Mao Zedong. In this interview he talks about his work with the Panchen Lama in Qinghai before the invasion and then the role the northwest cavalry played in the invasion and its aftermath. He also discusses the views of the Panchen Lama regarding what should be the political structure in Tibet vis-a-vis the Dalai Lama.   

---  
### Tape 1  

---

**A:**  After our conversation, [you can see] these photos that I took with the Dalai and Panchen. This is a drama I wrote.   

**Q:**  Oh, is it?   

**A:**  Yes, only American Sinologists can understand it. This is censored and not permitted by the government. This is about Qian Sima [early Han Dynasty]. Do you know Qian Sima?   

**Q:**  Yes, the author of Shiji (A Record of History).   

**A:**  This is a drama for radio broadcasting, and is known internationally. It has been broadcast in England and Germany. However, it cannot be broadcast in China. This is a drama for broadcasting.   

**Q:**  Can you give us a copy of this?   

**A:**  That is why I let you see it now. This book is very important. The key point is that you have to write about the truth in history. My bad experience is the same as Qian Sima . And this [photo] is me with the vice director of the People's Congress, Liau Han Sheng. At that time, I was already a general. Liau Han Sheng, was also the former commander of the northwest military headquarters. He succeeded Peng Dehuai.   

**Q:**  Would you please write something for us in the book?   

**A:**  Sure, all these are for you. If we talk now, we cannot finish in one or two days.   

**Q:**  That is true.   

**A:**  There are many things that were already publicized by newspapers. You have to tell me what your focus points are. Please ask him [Goldstein] what he mainly would like to know. Then I can start telling him what he wants to know.   

**Q:**  We discussed this and would like to ask you mainly three big questions. The first one: now looking back on the policy of Tibet, the gains and loses of the Tibetan policy, especially from your point of view, in Tibet at the time, what was done right, what mistakes were made or what things were done completely wrong. Could you please tell us something specific about this aspect?   

**A:**  So this is one thing.   

**Q:**  Yes. The second question: You participated in the negotiations with the Panchen's Kanting (Administrative Committee) and the local government of Tibet, the Kashag of Tibet. What was their relationship and their positions, what would you say about their positions since you participated in their negotiations directly?   

**A:**  I am familiar with all the information of the time.   

**Q:**  The third question: Regarding the preparation of democratic reforms, how was it carried out by the Preparatory Committee [for the Tibet Autonomous Region]. After 1957...   

**A:**  Sure, I am familiar with these. I accepted the task of liberating Tibet in Aug. 1949, before the liberation of Lanzhou. My position at the time was the Director of the Liaison Dept. in the First Field Army, under Peng DeHuai. At the time, that position was actually a director of intelligence work and united front work in the army, in the big military headquarters. It was a job to disintegrate the enemy. We wiped out Hu Zong Nan's troops in the northwest. He had more than 500,000 troops and through military means we eliminated more than 100,000 of his troops, but our work of disintegrating the enemy eliminated more than 200,000 of his troops. In the meantime, I was also the General Secretary of the Political Dept. of the First Field Army. In Feb. 1947, during the battles to protect Yanan, I was transferred from the position of the Party Secretary of the No. 6 cavalry division, to the First Field Army of Peng Dehuai. This is a brief introduction of myself. Lanzhou was liberated on August 26. When it was about August 19, when we were liberating Lanzhou, we got instructions from Chairman Mao. He asked us that when we liberated Lanzhou, we should try to protect the Panchen, to protect Tibetans, and to try to win over those [Tibetans] leaders in Gansu. We should also try to win over Huang Zhengqing [Aba Alo], the leader in southern Gansu. Chairman Mao sent a telegram to Peng Dehuai. In the First Field Army, which was also called the northwest field army, Peng Dehuai called a meeting of army commanders and leaders [of the field army]. I was at the meeting. At the meeting, [Peng] took out the telegram of Chairman Mao and ask us to discuss it. We discussed how, when we liberated Lanzhou, could we do the work of protecting the Panchen, and of trying to win over Panchen and Huang Zhenging. These words were very clear in the telegram. According to the instructions in this telegram, it was decided at the meeting, Peng decided, that these would be three main tasks for us. The special feature of my work in the northwest was ethnic work. Of my liaison work, the biggest part of it in the northwest was the ethnic work -- the work with Uighurs, Tibetans, Hui, and others. I was responsible for it. Before the liberation of Tibet, I was totally responsible for the ethnic work during the war time in the northwest. So at the time, it was natural that the job of working with Tibetans was given to me, I was totally responsible for the work with Tibetans. As the Director of the Liaison Dept. and the General Secretary, I was responsible for the work with Uighurs, Hui, and others, and that was why the job was given to me. Last year, the central military committee held a meeting to write about these things, to write a Series of Books of the history of the People's Liberation Army history. Part of it was the series on the strategies we used during the Liberation War [the civil war from 1945-49], this is the biggest part of the whole series. This part includes the actual record of carrying out ethnic policies in the northwest during the liberation war. The title of this part is called "Seriously Carrying Out the Ethnic Policies." A part of this is about the work we did with Hui in the northwest. Peng Dehuai was very good at doing ethnic work, he was an expert of ethnic work. The biggest achievements and the highest level ethnic work was done by Peng Dehuai. Peng Dehuai fell om power in 1959, so I fell down too. This book includes a small part of our work in Tibet. Regarding Tibetan questions, those that are controversial cannot be publicized. But there is a part about our ethnic work in Tibet that Chairman Mao considered to be superb, the kind of work like what was done by Juge Liang [a very wise statesman and strategist during the Three Kingdom Era in China.] Another high evaluation from Chairman Mao is a report about the ethnic united front work of Tibetans. These are his two highest evaluation of our work. These materials, if Mr. Goldstein needs them, he can take it. The material has not been publicized, because it involves Tibetan questions.   

**Q:**  Fanlou just said that he has a rule -- whoever provides the primary information to him, if it is discovered that there is confrontation, or it contains information that is considered "taboo" or offending to the above [higher level officials], if there are such things, he can make revisions about the names of people who provide him with the information or the information itself, or even consider not publishing the book. But he must respect the truth in history. If it is considered top secret, that is something else.   

**A:**  Facts, of course facts. Foreign newspapers have publicized these facts.   

**Q:**  There is an article about the Dalai and Panchen, I also heard something from a friend of mine, this person is the vice editor-in-chief of a magazine, Tibetan Literature. He said that a couple of years ago, Fanlao wrote an article, and it got to Tibetan Literature. The party committee of the autonomous region did not let them publish the article. If these do not belong to absolute top secret...   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  If not, could you please provide us with some information, because it is very valuable to us.   

**A:**  When I provide information to you -- since the Ministry of United Front has made these decisions, if it is not regarding struggles of policy issues within the party, if it is about facts, it is actually very clear. However, they just press you and do not let you publish it. Everyone knows these things, even the Dalai knows these things himself, but they just don't let you publish it. In August 1949, I accepted the task of doing the ethnic work of Tibetans. The order came after the unification of the whole country in 1949, it was Oct. 1950, -- the order might come in September when Chairman Mao made the decision of liberating Tibet. I am not going to talk about how the southwest got the order, I will only talk about myself. The order came in early October-- because on October 25, Peng Dehuai left for Korea. It was after Peng Dehuai went to Xinjiang to set up the ethnic work there. Of course, he [Goldstein] can read about all these things. I got the order after Peng went to Xinjiang. These materials have been published: the Korean War, going to Xinjiang, and going to Tibet. I went to Xinjiang too. When I got to Xinjiang, they asked me to be the party secretary and mayor of the city of Urumchi [capital city of Xinjiang]. So I handed over my work in the liaison department to someone else. I was a college student in the People's Liberation Army, they called me "the People's Liberation Army Hanlin." Do you know Hanlin?   

**Q:**  Yes, I know.   

**A:**  Hanlin was someone with rich knowledge, so they called me "the People's Liberation Army Hanlin." I drafted all the important documents in the northwest field army. Peng Dehuai asked me to do the liaison work in the Chinese People's Voluntary Army [troops that went to Korea]. I was about to take over that task when the order to liberate Tibet came. I was appointed the party secretary of the TWC, and Division Commander of the first cavalry division under the TWC. I accepted the task of liberating Tibet in October, 1950. On January 31, 1951, the central committee called me to Beijing to make a detailed report regarding all the preparations for liberating Tibet. There is detailed information regarding this, and he [Goldstein] said he has read it.   

**Q:**  Yes, he has read all that information.   

**A:**  So I will not go into details with that. He was the secretary of the central communist league in Tibet after we marched into Tibet. He participated in the anti-Japanese war, liberation war, and liberating the southwest. When we were going to liberate Tibet, it was decided 10,000 camels and yaks would be needed. This was a very big issue. The TWC made the decision. The TWC was very big. The main leaders of the TWC came from the liaison department. The central committee also transferred cadres from 8 provinces all over the country, from the central communist league, and the central party's academy, all together about 1000 cadres. The TWC at the time was not called the northwest TWC, it was [just] called the TWC, the leader was the commander and the political commissar. My work included the ethnic work in southern Gansu. One thing was to win over the Panchen and Huang Zhengqing, another was to resolve the disputes within the ethnic group. [among Tibetans]. There was a movie after the liberation called "Gold and Silver Lake." It was about Tibetans after I worked with them to resolve their disputes. I was doing the work of ethnic unity and the unity of the ethnic masses. We were trying to win over the Panchen and Huang Zhengqing. I was appointed by the northwest military headquarters to be the representative in Panchen's traveling administration. In was the position of a [Han] governor to Tibet in the Panchen's headquarters. It was decided on in February 1951, and I actually filled the position in March.   

**Q:**  So you were appointed to the position in Feb. 1951, and got to the position in March?   

**A:**  The order was given in Feb. 1951. I arrived at the position in April. Zhaxi (Tib. ཊཤི), do you know Zhaxi, the Zhaxi in Qinghai? Zhaxi was the vice governor of Qinghai. He accompanied me to the Panchen's place. The Panchen was in the picture. The Panchen was 12 years old.   

**Q:**  Your experience is very interesting. Just now, you said you worked as representative in the Panchen's headquarters. There were a lot of problems between the Panchen's administration and Kashag. As a representative there, what did you think of these problems, what did you do, and afterward, ...?   

**A:**  Why was my position called representative to the Panchen's traveling administration? In the past, in history, there were Han governors in Tibet. There were Han governors in Front Tibet [Ch. qian zang]. In the map of China at the time, you see front and back Tibet [Ch. hou zang], Tibet was not called Xizang [Tibet]. The term Xizang was used after the liberation. In the past, Front Tibet belonged to the Dalai, and Back Tibet belonged to the Panchen. Regarding the 9th Panchen and 13th Dalai, one wanted to cooperate with the motherland, the other insisted on separation. Because of this difference, they fought with each other. The Dalai drove the Panchen to inland China [Ch. neidi], so the Panchen was not in Tibet. At that time, the Dalai and Panchen were like emperors. They were treated like little emperors in everything. "Kanting" was Panchen's government. When they were in inland China, they could not use the name "government." It was called "xingyuan [traveling administration] of Panchen, the Teacher." In the past, when an emperor went to places outside the capital on official visits, his group was called xingyuan. It represented his administration. Wherever he stayed, it was his travelling administration representing his government so the Panchen's traveling administration represented his governing structure in Back Tibet. In history, there was Front and Back Tibet. Dalai's government was called Kashag and Panchen's government was called Kanting. They two did not have a relationship in which one belonged to another. They were parallel structures. When the Tibetans met, they would say there were the sun and the moon in the sky, and there were the Dalai and the Panchen on earth. They would say Tibetans were brothers. They were people under different rulers. Before the central people's government was founded, there was an official in Panchen's group. He was a Sinologist, Tibetologist, and a politician. He was a great man. He was the Panchen's representative in Nanjing. [capital of Guomindang's government at the time.] The representative of Kashag in Nanjing was Derenci, and the representative of Panchen's traveling administration to Nanjing was Che Jigme. The Panchen's group always endorsed the unification of China. In history, the 5th Panchen endorsed the idea. When it was time when the communist party founded the people's government, one month before that, I invited Che Jigme to our liaison dept. As soon as I got to Lanzhou, I sent someone to get in touch with the Panchen, and the Panchen sent Che Jigme to us. I still have the portrait of the Panchen that Che Jigme brought to me the first time he came to us. When the People's Republic was founded, the Panchen's group announced their support to the communist party and to the central people's government. These materials are published in the journal, "Red Flag" in the collection called "Himalaya Mountains." This tradition of the Panchen's group did not start from this Panchen. It started long long ago, from the 5th Panchen. The 5th Panchen endorsed a unified China, and because of this, he had confrontations with the 10th Dalai. The 10th Panchen also insisted on the unification of the motherland. Under any circumstances, the Panchen's group always insisted on unification, against Tibet separating from China.   

**Q:**  Just now, you talked about the question of front and back Tibet. We asked that when you and the People's Liberation Army troops first got to Tibet, did the Panchen's group have the idea of making the Gambala Mountain Pass a dividing line between Front and Back Tibet? Did the Panchen's group have the idea at the time?   

**A:**  I am going to talk about this next. When Dalai's group drove the Panchen away, of course, they controlled both front and back Tibet. But legally, and on the map at the time, the central government did not acknowledge this. At this time, on the Chinese map, there was Front and Back Tibet. The Panchen's group, of course, when they were trying to resume their power, they were thinking of controlling Back Tibet. At the time, [when the People's Liberation Army were getting into Tibet] without any question, the Panchen's group was thinking of controlling Back Tibet. I will tell you when this changed.   

**Q:**  Since there was a division between front and back Tibet, where did Ngari belong at the time.   

**A:**  The region of Ngari belonged to Front Tibet. But there was Panchen's land in Front Tibet, in Lhasa. The Panchen also had a large region in Xinjiang. He also had some land in Qinghai. There was some Panchen's land in Ngari. So there was no absolute clear division that the front Tibet belonged to Dalai, and the back Tibet belonged to Panchen. The Front Tibet was mainly controlled by the Dalai, and the back Tibet mainly was controlled by the Panchen, but they both had land in the other one's territory.   

**Q:**  We understand you are going to talk about it later, but during the negotiations in 1951, the role of Panchen and Dalai ...   

**A:**  Without what I am telling you now, I can't make it clear for him later on. Later on, the Panchen wanted to become independent, and other things. Under such situations, later on, the Southwest Bureau was formed. They founded the Tibet Work Committee -- it was called the TWC and it was mainly made up from the 18th Army. From Chengdu, to Xikang, at the time, the region of Tibet was divided into four parts: Xikang, ... . Tibet today is made up of four big regions from the past; you can also say five big regions: Xikang was a province, it was in the south, the Khambas area. We have to be clear about these historical questions, so we can get things clear later on. The other parts include Chamdo, the region of Lhasa, and back Tibet. Back Tibet was Tashilhumpo province and Shigatse. Lhasa is in Front Tibet, and Shigatse is in Back Tibet. Another part is Ngari. This is the whole Tibetan region. The major division was the Front Tibet, Back Tibet, and Xikang. The whole region of Tibet was like this. Tibet today is made up of these three main regions. These places were different in size, but they were all at province level. Many people do not understand these things. This is history. On May 1, 1950, the Panchen sent Che Jigme to the central committee, he met with Chairman Mao, and presented a khata scarf to Chairman Mao. At this time, a negotiation between the Panchen's Kanting and the central committee was on the agenda. The Panchen wanted to have a radio transmitter, he wanted to found his own troops, these were in the 12 points [he asked for]. In August, 1950, Chairman Mao urged the northwest, Peng Dehuai, to solve the problem of Tibet. And to achieve this, roads had to be built. When Peng Dehuai got the instructions, he called us to discuss the question. There were many difficulties for us if the northwest had to solve the Tibetan question completely by itself [i.e., invade Tibet]. There were problems of finance, human resources, and other things. We had many difficulties to complete the task within a short period of time, so we sent a telegram to Chairman Mao. We suggested that Liu [Bocheng] and Deng [Xiaoping] march into Tibet from the southwest, and the northwest will cooperate with them. This was a decision made in 1950, before Chamdo was liberated. So the task of liberating Tibet was changed, it was not a task solely for the northwest, it was divided by the southwest and northwest. After the task was divided, we started to move the troops to liberate Chamdo. We tried to do peaceful negotiations with the Dalai, and after we did some work, he still refused to negotiate with us. He sent Ngabö, Lhalu and the cavalry troops of the Tibetan army to Chamdo. Under such circumstance, we were firm to fight with them in Chamdo. Negotiations were sought first, but now we were firm to go to battle. The northwest troops-- my cavalry detachment, moved from Xiangrede to Dingqing [Tib. ཊེངཆེན], to move behind Ngabö and Lhalu. It was the cavalry detachment of the First Field Army, and I was the Division Commander of the cavalry division. We wiped out their entire troops. In Chamdo, the 18th army used cannons, and next, our cavalry detachment fought with them. Now, Ngabö -- these are things in history, Ngabö was captured by my troops.   

**Q:**  Who captured Ngabö?   

**A:**  Our cavalry detachment. In the battle of liberating Chamdo, the fighting was going on and we were moving fast while they were doing a withdrawal, and at Dingqeng, in Shanqiao, Lhalu and Ngabö were defeated. The troops of the northwest, I was the commander of the cavalry division. After we captured Ngabö, there were some disputes among our troops. From this point on, we had some problems with the southwest. When we captured Ngabö, and his horse which had a gold saddle, and there were other things of his, weapons, that we captured. The other side came [the 18th army] and asked for these things. So they took the captive and all his things, including the gold saddle. The troops of Peng Dehuai always gave consideration to the whole situation. So we gave them these things. They did not get such orders from a high level, just the division level officer, Wu Zhong. We handed over all the captives and their stuff to the 18th army. We completed our task. The task [of liberating Tibet] would be completed from two routes. Our task was to liberate Nagchuka (Ch. Hehei). Please let him read this part of the history. From Hehei, we were to move directly to Shigatse. That was the original strategic plan. The 18th army liberated Xikang.   

**Q:**  Goldstein thought this was done by the southwest bureau, by the 18th army. If at that time Ngabö escaped from this route and you did not outflanked him, things would have been quite different later on.   

**A:**  In that case, we just could not win an opportunity to liberate Tibet peacefully.   

**Q:**  Would that [peaceful liberation of Tibet] have been very difficult?   

**A:**  We captured all the enemy forces. The special feature of the northwest troops, Peng Dehuai's troops, was being able to conquer large number of enemies with only a small military force. It was the same in Korea. The northwest troop was the smallest, and it wiped out 500,000 enemy troops. Peng Dehuai's strategies were rare in the world. The Americans know this. My bad experience started later on because I was a major aide of Peng Dehuai. I was imprisoned for 13 years. Everyone knows this in the world. When the People's Liberation Army marched into Tibet, the central committee and the party divided the task into liberating front Tibet and back Tibet. The organs founded at the time were for front and back Tibet. Later on, they forced it on me that I was the one who divided up Tibet into front and back Tibet.   

**Q:**  At the time, did the central committee decide that there was front and back Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, a front and back Tibet.   

**Q:**  Was the northwest military headquarters going to enter Shigatse?   

**A:**  Yes, directly from Hehei [Nagchuka].   

**Q:**  At the time, did the central committee decide that the task of liberating Tibet was divided into front Tibet and back Tibet, and what changes occurred before and after the liberation of Tibet?   

**A:**  The reason I am talking about this is making way for later stories, how it was divided, and how it was merged. Without the information I am telling you, I can't make later stories clear. The southwest was responsible for liberating Lhasa, we were responsible for liberating back Tibet, even Ngari was our task. The troops from Xinjiang, Wang Zheng's troops, liberated Ngari. They were under my command. The name of our TWC was changed into northwest TWC. The TWC of southwest was called the southwest TWC. Before they got to Tibet, their TWC was meant for working in Tibet. The TWC of northwest was also a TWC, the northwest TWC. After the merger, it was called the Working Committee of Tibetan Region. There was a big difference. If I don't tell you, no one knows what they were really doing in these things. [The TWC] was like the party committee of a province. If you don't come to me, they would not tell you such things, even if you come to China. Ngabö surrendered to us. Ngabö's surrender really helped the peaceful liberation of Tibet. We tried to win over Ngabö. Ngabö did not prefer fighting with us. He fought with us because he got the order to do so. After we talked with him, he sent a telegram to the Dalai. His contribution started from there. Ngabö was captured by us, and through our work he changed his attitude toward us, and he sent a telegram to the Dalai telling the Dalai that the communist party was good and China should be unified. He urged the Dalai to do peaceful negotiation with us. From this point of view, without the battles at this time, there would be no peaceful liberation of Tibet. Different things were tried before, through India, through Nehru, but nothing worked. You have to acknowledge this. If people don't acknowledge this, don't acknowledge that the northwest did this for liberating Tibet, that is not realistic. After fighting with us, Ngabö telegrammed the Dalai This was a big contribution of Ngabö. This [photo] is the Dalai, the Panchen, me, and Song Qingling.   

**Q:**  Did you write these words?   

**A:**  These were written by a famous calligrapher. Both of these two were written by two famous calligraphers. This is, "With the 18th Army, Joining Forces, Unity." This is an activity that I arranged, the two troops joining together. At first, [the task of liberating Tibet] was divided. Everything was divided into front and back Tibet. After the two troops joined forces, confrontation started. After the Dalai received the telegram, he organized the peace delegation headed by Surkhang, and agreed to conduct peaceful negotiations. In early October 1951 , as the party secretary of the northwest TWC, I accompanied the Panchen to start from Taer [Kumbum] Monastery, passing Lanzhou and Xi'an to Beijing. Through the whole journey, everything was done according to the rituals of the Qing Dynasty when the Panchen went to Beijing. The escorting forces and everything along the journey followed traditional ritual patterns in history. When the Panchen got to Beijing, he went to Changuanlou. Do you know the place? It is in the western suburbs. It was a building in the Beijing Zoo. [This is a famous building that was used only by the royal family in Qing Dynasty.] One thing planned at the time was to get the Panchen to present a scarf (khata) to Chairman Mao at Tiananmen on May 1, Labor Day, so the whole world could see this. The Panchen was the first Tibetan to present a Khata scarf to Chairman Mao and it was very meaningful. The person who accepted the khata for Chairman Mao was Li Weihan, and I was beside Chairman Mao. This was the first time when I had gotten onto Tiananmen. As the Han governor in Tibet, I escorted the Panchen when he met with Chairman Mao. Later on, when I was pulled down, they covered up [my face] in this picture. But this is history. At Tiananmen, after inspecting the troops, during a break, Chairman Mao started his first conversation with the Panchen. Premier Zhou, Li Weihan, me, Che Jigme, and the Panchen were present. During the conversation, Chairman Mao praised the Panchen's group. At the same time, he said, all nationalities in China are united together. Tibetans are united together with other nationalities in China, and Tibetans are united among themselves, Tibetans in front and back Tibet are united together internally. This was 1951. This was with the Dalai in Potala Palace. This is my wife, she was at the time a leader of the Youth Association, and she was with the Panchen's mother and brother in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  This was in Beijing?   

**A:**  Yes, this was in the Temple of Heaven in Beijing. So the key point was that all nationalities in China should unite together, and all nationalities should unite together internally. We were unlike the Guomindang who tried to win over one group, and in the meantime, try to hit another group. So at the time, we asked the Panchen to cooperate with the central committee in winning over the Dalai. This was our policy. And this was the time when the central committee decided that Tibet should be a unified Tibet, not a front and back Tibet. This was the first time when such a decision was made. Tibet should be a unified Tibet, not a front Tibet and a back Tibet. Tibetans should unite together internally, and the Dalai and the Panchen should unite together. The central committee would provide unified leadership to the whole of Tibet. However, the Dalai and Panchen's offices, based on their traditional systems from the Qing Dynasty, these governing structures at province level in front and back Tibet, would remain parallel structures. A unified Tibet did not mean to unify the Dalai under the Panchen or to unify the Panchen under the Dalai. That was not the case. It was a unified Tibet under which there were two units. The Panchen's existing position would not change, and the Dalai's existing position would not change. The title of the record of this conversation was: "To Guarantee the Existing Position of the Panchen." Some people with their secret goals tried to change history by twisting the facts. They said that when this conversation was held at Tiananmen, Ngabö, Che Jigme, and the Panchen were all present, having a conversation with Chairman Mao. They changed history into such things they created themselves.   

**Q:**  How could Ngabö be there at that time? At that time, Ngabö and the Panchen could not meet with each other at all because the [Dalai's group] did not acknowledge/recognize the Panchen.   

**A:**  They had to first acknowledge the Panchen, and only after that, their Tibetan representatives could meet with the Panchen. So these people twisted the truth and changed history just like this. These had connections with what happened later on. Maybe the history he read was the version in which Ngabö and Panchen were both in the conversation with Chairman Mao.   

