# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0230.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Fan Ming  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Xi'an, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Fan Ming  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 83  
**Date of Birth:** 1910  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Fan Ming was a Major-General in the 1st field army and a senior cadre in the Northwest Bureau. He was the overall commander of the northwest cavalry troops that entered Lhasa in December 1951 under the terms of the 17-Point Agreement, and then served as a senior cadre in the Tibet Work Committee (Ch. xizang gong wei) until his arrest, expulsion from Lhasa and imprisonment in Xi'an in 1958. He was a strong supporter of the Panchen Lama and a strong opponent of Zhang Guohua and the Tibet policy of Mao Zedong. In this interview he talks about the negotiations for the 17-Point Agreement, especially the arguments between the Dalai Lama's representatives and the Panchen Lama's people, and then about the coming to Tibet of the troops from the Northwest and Southwest armies.   

---  
### Tape 2  

---

**A:**  Because my identity was as the representative in Panchen's traveling administration, it became inconvenient since the other side did not recognize the Panchen. (Phüntso Wangye was in our (CCP) party.) The negotiation group within the party (CCP) decided that I was appointed the vice party secretary within the negotiation group. So I did not appear at the negotiation table. I participated in the meetings of the party, which decided about making replies to certain questions and made all the decisions. When they decided on the final version of the agreement, Li Weihan was there, Phüntso Wangye was the translator. Zhang Guohua and Zhang Jingwu were at the negotiation table. The point is: though I did not appear at the negotiation table, I fully participated in the internal decision making process, and my role was to resolve the major problems that arose. Those who actually were sitting at the negotiation table, they had to report everything back at those party meetings, and all decisions had to be made at our party meetings. In fact, the negotiation group was a entity for the outside, and the actual decision maker was the party committee behind the scene. I was representing the Panchen's side in the decision making process. I was the one who obtained opinions from the Panchen's side. I was like the secretary of the party committee of a province. The negotiations took ten days and started from May 12th and ended on the 22th of the month. I gave you those written materials about the negotiations which included details about the struggles involved in the negotiations. What I am telling you now includes the major questions involved in the negotiation, the arguments that occurred during the negotiations, and the questions that were negotiated during the process. The struggle was intense. The first issue: they did not admit that it was a negotiation between the Tibetan local government and the central government. They believed that they represented a country of Tibet, and this was a negotiation between their country and the central people's government. The first round of struggle was difficult. We presented all those historical documents. They saw those documents, and still did admit it was a negotiation between the Tibetan local government and the central government. They insisted that the 12th [means the 13th] Dalai had already driven away the Hans. We told them, if they insisted it was a negotiation between Tibetan country and the central people's government, the negotiation could not continue, please go back to Tibet and we would give the order to our troops to march into Tibet. Then those Tibetans had discussions among themselves, and maybe on the third day, they said that it was a problem of translation. They said that the central committee [Ch. zhongyang] was translated as "China." They said that it was a mistake in translation, and they had corrected the mistake. The negotiation was indeed one between the Tibetan local government and the central government. This was the first round of struggle. They admitted that Tibet was an inseparable part of China, that the negotiations were between the Tibetan local government and the central government. The second point was about the recognition of the Panchen. They [the Dalai's side] did not recognize the Panchen. [They said] this Panchen was not legitimate. They had two Panchen [candidates] themselves. This one [the one that supported the central government at the time] was a child calculated to be the Panchen. They had their own two Panchen candidates. The normal procedure was that only after the ceremony of drawing lots could the real Panchen be acknowledged. The formal acknowledgement of Panchen came after what was called "drawing lots from a gold urn." This was an absolutely necessary procedure for Panchen. Without this procedure, there would be no formal recognition of the Panchen. Another thing was that after the procedure of drawing lots, the central government had to formally approve the result. The Dalai also had to be approved by the central government. After the ceremony of drawing lots, the Panchen became religiously legitimate, but not legitimate yet in his administrative position. He had to be approved by the central government, in the past, this was the Guomindang government. In the second round of the negotiation, they raised this question.   

**Q:**  About the question of acknowledging the Panchen, did the representatives raise this point? Since the Tibetan aristocrats were laymen, and the decision whether to acknowledgement the Panchen had to come from Dalai Lama, these aristocrats were in no position to say yes or no to the question of acknowledging the Panchen. Did the Tibetan representatives in the negotiation say this?   

**A:**  They were laymen? Their representatives were comprised of a combination of religion and state [lay and monk officials].   

**Q:**  That is not what I mean. About the question of whether to recognize the Panchen, the Tibetan representatives said that they did not have the power to say yes or no, and that only Dalai Lama had that power, right? Did they ever say this?   

**A:**  No. In Tibet, when they recognize a chosen child as the Panchen, they have to go through the procedure of drawing lots from a gold urn. This was a law made by the central government. The gold urn was given to Tibetans by the central government. The name that popped out of the gold vase would be the Panchen, and only after this procedure would a Panchen become legitimate. He formally becomes Panchen according to the law of the central government and according to their religious rules. The Dalai did not have to say yes or no to this. It had nothing to do with the Dalai. There were two things they argued about during the negotiations. That the Panchen at the time had not gone through the procedure of casting lots from the gold urn, and the Guomindang government never gave approval to this Panchen. Without the gold urn ceremony, the Panchen was not legitimate according to the religious rule, and without a certificate of appointment from the central government, he was not legitimate according to the law. These representatives, of course, they had full powers for the negotiation. With this question, we became passive for a while. We looked through the files of the Guomindang, but did not get a good clue. Anyway, it was getting very late at night and Li Weihan gave me an order that I had to get this task done before the negotiations started on the next day. What did I do? I thought of a way of taking away the wood from the fire. I did not directly tackle the problem. There was no time to go through the Guomindang files. The problem had to be solved by the next day, so I went to see the Panchen, Che Jigme, and Lalu [?]. I asked them what they thought of the question and how they would solve the problem. They laughed. They said that they already expected that the other side must raise such a question, so they had gotten everything ready. They took out the approval document for the Panchen. The document was signed in Nanjing, and it was a formal certificate of appointment for the Panchen by the Guomindang government. They gave the document to me. So I got this document. This document actually solved two problems. It said that the chosen child, Chökyi Gyaltsen, was spared from having to do the lot casting ceremony, and was recognized to be the Panchen, the Great Teacher. So it established Panchen's position and power. This document really solved two problems. Our representatives took this document to the negotiation table. The other side argued with us again. They said that Panchen did not go through the procedure of casting lots in the gold vase. They said the government's approval was one thing, but there was one religious procedure still missing, so this Panchen was not legitimate. We expected they would ask such questions, so we were prepared. There were always special circumstances. When the government gave them the gold urn, a religious ceremony of lot casting, of course, would be held. But under certain circumstances, the government could ask them to do the religious ceremony, it could also ask them to skip this religious procedure, due to the unusual features of a chosen child. So we produced this document of approval of the Panchen. Those Tibetans looked at it, and they saw the government's approval and the decision of skipping the religious procedure, and the red seal of the Guomindang government on the document. Then they said OK, they acknowledged the Panchen. The third question in the negotiation they raised was when they said that the approval was there, but this Panchen had not have his inauguration ceremony. It was true that when the 13th Dalai Lama had his inauguration ceremony, the Guomindang government sent their officials to Lhasa. The Tibetans had to acknowledge the central government, without it, the inauguration of the Dalai or Panchen would be illegitimate. Without a government seal, a Dalai or Panchen could not become legitimate. This was the 13th Dalai. We have a complete set of written information about this struggle. I was a Major General at the time, I was a general. Those representatives who were sent to the Dalai and Panchen's administrations were all generals. The Guomindang representative in Panchen's administration, Jin Zai Ye, was also a major general. I took over his place, and my military rank was Major General. We did not have the information about an inauguration ceremony of the Panchen. The PRC had just been founded, and the Guomindang took away their files when they fled. It would not make sense to go through the files of the Qing government within the little time I had. So I went to Panchen's group again. They said that an inauguration ceremony was held, and they took out the pictures that were taken at the ceremony. The other side said they now acknowledge this inauguration, but they raised another question about the Panchen. They said that according to the traditional rules, when Dalai had his inauguration ceremony, he had to have a representative from the Panchen present. When Panchen had his inauguration, he must have someone from the Dalai's side at the ceremony, either the Dalai himself or his representative. We had all the information about the Dalai's inauguration ceremony -- names of the representatives from the central government, and the whole procedure of the ceremony. We had the information of the inauguration ceremony of the 9th Panchen. However, we did not have any evidence that someone from Dalai's side had come to the Panchen's inauguration ceremony. Other things were easy, but this was really difficult. I went to the Panchen's group again. Che Jigme was truly somebody. They got everything ready. At the time of Panchen's inauguration, the Guomindang was about to fall, so there was no Dalai's representative sent from Lhasa. They telegrammed to Nanjing, and invited the Director of Kashag's office in Nanjing to attend Panchen's inauguration ceremony. He went, and Che Jigme had the pictures. With those pictures at the negotiation table, the problem of acknowledgement of Panchen was solved. So far three questions covered. The 4th question they raised was meeting with the Panchen. When everything about Panchen was proven legitimate, they had to formally meet with Panchen. Without this formal meeting, the acknowledgement was still not final. They argued about this, and telegrammed the Dalai. The Dalai made a sacred calculation and decided that this Panchen was truly the real Panchen. The Dalai sent a telegram to Beijing. All the Tibetan representatives of the delegation, headed by Ngabö and Surkhang [Surkhang actually was not in Beijing], went to meet with Panchen according to the highest level courtesy in Tibetan custom. They prostrated before the Panchen and the Panchen touched their heads to give them his blessing. Thus, the Panchen was completely recognized, and the four big questions were resolved. The central question afterwards was to restore the power and prestige of Panchen. Did you read the Agreement?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  In the Agreement, the biggest part was about restoring the power and prestige of the Panchen. They said that the 9th Panchen had left Tibet for many years, and in the past, the Panchen was always under the control of the Dalai. They raised the question of Panchen's position again. They [the Panchen's side?] said that the former power and prestige of the Panchen was granted by the Qing government, later on, the Panchen was driven out of Tibet, and the Panchen lost his power and prestige. There was an argument going on for a while during the negotiations. If they [the Tibetan delegation] did not agree to restore the power and prestige of Panchen, their acknowledgement of Panchen was false. In that way, they did not agree that the Dalai and the Panchen were parallel, and they would actually put the Panchen under Dalai, under the Kashag. They believed that the Panchen's Kanting religiously belonged to Dalai and administratively belonged to the Kashag. We had to make it clear about front and back Tibet. By now, Tibet was a unified Tibet, but it came to a point to restore the relationship between the Dalai's and Panchen's group as two parallel [equal] structures. During the negotiations, the question of acknowledging the power and prestige of Panchen was in fact the same question as that of acknowledging the power of the central government. On the surface, it was a question of the Panchen, but in fact, it was a question of putting the whole of Tibet under the unified leadership of the central government instead of putting the Panchen under the Kashag. Through argument, at the negotiation table we presented those gold and silver certificates of appointment from emperors to those Han governors in Back Tibet -- these things were all in the Palace Museum. Finally, at last, they agreed to acknowledge the power and prestige of Panchen. The way to restore Panchen's power and prestige was to organize a special negotiation group for this purpose. By 1952, Panchen's power and prestige were completely restored.   

**Q:**  Completely restored?   

**A:**  After the negotiation, the Panchen went back to Tibet, his power and prestige were completely restored. Lhasa organized a group, and we sent one representative. There are the five main questions in that agreement .Following this, there were two direct questions [Here he is referring to the 17-Point Agreement], which went through some delay. One question was the reorganization of the Tibetan army, another was to stop issuing Tibetan currency.   

**Q:**  He [Goldstein] is interested in the question of the reorganization of the Tibetan army. This question aroused strong objections by the two Sitsab and caused further problems. There were also disagreements about whether to establish a military and political committee. What was done about these things? What were some of the ideas at the time regarding these questions? What do you think of these questions?   

**A:**  Let me talk about my questions one by one. The next thing was the signing of the peaceful agreement. When the peaceful agreement was singed, the questions that I covered just now were all solved, but these two things could not be solved at the time. There was a duplicate copy of the peaceful agreement [secret appendix of the agreement?]. In Chamdo, we captured weapons from the Tibetan army. We would return these weapons when the Tibetan army got reorganized, and when the Tibetan military headquarters were established. We would return these weapons when conditions were ripe. We would not return these weapons immediately. These were weapons made in England. In order to appease the Tibetans, we would return all these weapons to them. Another question was about the Tibetan currency. The central government would take the Tibetan currency from circulation by giving them silver dollars, and after the government took back the Tibetan currency from circulation, the local government could not issue any more of them. These things were in this duplicate copy of the agreement. [secret appendix of the agreement?] The signing date of the document was May 22nd or 23rd. They telegrammed the Dalai, informing him that they were about to sign the agreement. When the agreement was singed, the atmosphere was quite good. Those Tibetan politicians, they learned from the British. They learned the methods that the British used in their colonies. They played with politics. In the meantime, they also used superstition or something in religion to explain things. Right after signing of the agreement, there came 30 very loud thunders in the sky. At the time, all the Tibetans kneeled down. They exclaimed that it was wrong to sign the agreement, they sounded very sad, but they had already singed it. This was signing of the agreement.   

**Q:**  This is very interesting.   

**A:**  The power of god and the power of the religion, these were from history. The Dalai's group divided into two parts: one group endorsed the peaceful agreement, the other group got the Dalai to escape to Yadong near India.   

**Q:**  That place is right at the border of India.   

**A:**  Yes. Dalai got there and he was getting ready to go abroad. The group headed by Lukhangwa tried hard to get the Dalai to go to India. The group headed by Ngabö in the Dalai's group had different ideas. They disagreed with the idea of getting the Dalai to escape. Under such circumstance, Ngabö asked the delegation to sent a telegram to the Dalai, asking the Dalai to send a telegram and formally endorsing the peaceful agreement, that is, to give his approval to the agreement. In the meantime, we sent Zhang Jingwu -- he was a lieutenant general, to Yadong via India to persuade the Dalai to go back to Lhasa. There were two things going on. One, we sent a representative to Dalai to welcome him back, and in the meantime, the representative sent a telegram to Dalai, asking him to acknowledge the peaceful agreement. Dalai sent a telegram to the central committee, giving his endorsement to the agreement and he also sent a telegram to Chairman Mao, expressing his support to the central government and a unified China. At this point, the process of unifying Tibet with China, the peaceful liberation of Tibet, was completed in its legal procedures, in real actions and in the documents. The peaceful agreement was truly a great achievement.   

**Q:**  Regarding Zhang Jingwu going to Yadong, Goldstein heard that Zhang went to Yadong in order to persuade the Dalai Lama to endorse the peaceful agreement. However, at the time, Zhang Jingwu's presents for the Dalai had not arrived. The central committee had not decided at the time to get Zhang Jingwu to Yadong and then to Lhasa. His task was to persuade the Dalai, so his plan was to go to Yadong, and then go back to Beijing. There was no decision at the time to keep him in Lhasa. Only because his presents had not arrive, he had no other choice [but go to Lhasa]. Goldstein asks whether this is the reason?   

**A:**  Zhang Jingwu was the representative of the central committee. He was a Han governor in Tibet, a representative of Chairman Mao and the central committee. I was a representative to the Panchen's administration, I also represented the central government, but in order to avoid confrontations with the Dalai's group, I was representing the northwest military headquarters, the headquarters of Peng Dehuai. Zhang Jingwu was in the same position as those Han governors in Tibet during the Qing Dynasty, and in the meantime, he was the representative of Chairman Mao. At the time, he went to persuade the Dalai, he was also going to Lhasa. He did not travel to Lhasa with the Dalai. The Dalai agreed to go back to Lhasa. Zhang Jingwu went back to Lhasa himself. The talk about presents was a joke. What presents could he bring at the time? He could not bring any. Zhang Jingwu was the representative to Lhasa in front Tibet, and I was the representative to the Panchen's administration. These two representatives were both under the direct leadership of the central government, just like the Dalai and Panchen who were parallel were both under the leadership of Beijing. As the representative to the Panchen's administration, I was also under the leadership of the central government, Zhang Jingwu, a representative to the Dalai's Kashag, he was the same as me. It was like the central government had direct leadership of the Dalai's group and the Panchen's group as well. It was just like this. It was not that a small representative was under the leadership of a big representative. Many people do not understand this.   

**Q:**  Was it the original plan that the Dalai's and the Panchen's groups were parallel and both under the leadership of the central government?   

**A:**  This was what we argued about in the Agreement and it was reflected in the Agreement. Just now, I talked a lot about all those arguments regarding the recognition of the Panchen, and the whole point was to restore the power and prestige of the Panchen. It was specified in the Agreement. As two political entities, the Dalai's and the Panchen's groups were both under the leadership of the central government. The Panchen was not under the Dalai's leadership and the Dalai was not under the Panchen's leadership. So as a representative to Panchen's administration, I was appointed by the central government and was under the leadership of the central government. I was in that position until 1956 when the preparatory committee was established. At that time, the central committee formally dismissed me from the position as a representative to the Panchen's administration. First it was called the Military and Political Committee, and later on it was called the Preparatory Committee of the Autonomous Region. At that point, there was one unified leading structure in Tibet, so both Zhang Jingwu and me were dismissed from our positions as representatives. The Dalai became the director of the Committee and the Panchen became the Deputy Director of the Committee. This was a government body, a unified one, the preparatory committee. You cannot get things the way I tell you from anywhere else. No one else can make such things clear. I experienced the whole thing. Before 1958, I was in charge of the work in Tibet. Zhang Guohua was in charge of the army in Tibet. I was the First Deputy Political Commissar in the army in Tibet, the First Deputy Political Commissar in the military headquarters, whereas Zhang Guohua was the Commander. Later on, he was, for a while the Deputy Party Secretary just like me. Zhang Jingwu was the Party Secretary. But I was in the Tibet Work Committee (TWC), which held the political power. In fact, I was like a Deputy Secretary for day-to-day work. Let me go back to where I was in talking about before. When Zhang Jingwu got there, he persuaded the Dalai to acknowledge the Agreement and to support the central government. So everything was accomplished. In the meantime, they accepted the terms in the Agreement for the People's Liberation Army to enter Xizang [Tibet], to liberate Tibet peacefully and not through military means. That was how the marching into Tibet was decided. It was specified in the Agreement. At the time, marching into Tibet involved the northwest troops of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and the TWC of the People's Liberation Army. I was a main leader in the TWC. The southwest did not have a TWC. They did not have a formal position for the TWC, a leader in their troops was in charge of the work, that was all. My appointment in the TWC was formally given by the central committee. When the northwest troops marched into Tibet, my troops were renamed to be under the 18th Army, the code was "douzi". It was for publicity in newspapers, so the outside knew there was only one army involved in this action. "Douzi" represented the TWC, the northwest People's Liberation Army. It was only a code. It was May 22nd or 21st, on the next day, the central committee sent Zhang Guohua and me to Chongjing to meet with Deng Xiaoping. We were in the same army now. The northwest troops that were going to Tibet were now under the unified leadership of Deng Xiaoping and the southwest bureau. We became an "Independent Detachment." It was only a code, and other things did not change, the [northwest's] TWC still existed. The central committee sent Zhang Guohua and me to report to Party Secretary Deng in the Southwest Bureau. I asked him about the whole plan of marching into Tibet. At our meeting with Deng, we made the decision that the two troops [northwest and southwest] would not merge at this time, and each would march into Tibet from different routes, and the existing structure of the troops would remained the same. The northwest troop still remained under the leadership of the northwest bureau and northwest military headquarters, and the 18th army still remained under the leadership of the southwest bureau. We would march into Tibet separately, but when we met in Lhasa, we would reorganize into a unified military unit, and there would be one unified TWC. This was a decision made on May 25th. These decisions were very clear in the written materials. In the northwest troops, there were more of those older comrades, and the troops were very good. It was decided that after we marched separately as different troops to Lhasa, we would set up a unified Working Committee of the Tibetan Region, and the two TWCs [from the northwest and the southwest] would set up a unified Tibetan Autonomous Region, and the two troops would set up a unified Tibetan Military Headquarters. Under this decision, the 18th Army organized an Advanced Detachment headed by Wang Qimei. They would take Ngabö with them and start the march in July. They were going to Lhasa, and they arrived in August. This was for the first time in history that the People's Liberation Army was stationed in Lhasa. There was a lot of coverage of this in newspapers all over the world. It was about this advanced detachment. Who was the guide for the advanced detachment? Ngabö. Ngabö guided them, which was actually a reinforced company, to Lhasa, and they protected Ngabö on the way. The 52th Division was the main force in the 18th Army. It was mainly the 52th division, together with other troops. They got to Lhasa, and went to stations in Gyantse, Yadong, and other places. The 18th army arrived in mid-October. My troops traveled through the plateau regions located at 4,000 or 5,000 km. above sea level. We started on July 1, the birthday of our party, from Lanzhou in Gansu, going to Xining, and then to Xiangrede. My troops were completely cavalry troops. Each soldier had two horses. One horse could not make it. Altogether we had 10,000 cattle: camels, yaks, mules. We gathered almost all the camels in our country. This troop made history. Without these cattle, we would have had terrible trouble at the Tongtian River. In history, such big troops like ours all failed when they entered Tibet. The son of Emperor Kangxi, the son of Emperor Qianlong, they all failed. Ma Bufang failed too. They were all wiped out when they got to the Tangula Mountains. The mountains were blocked by snow. We were the only troops that succeeded. You can read about this in this material titled: "Passing the Tangula Mountains." Seven days and seven nights, we rushed through the mountains. If someone died, we did not stop, we moved on. We marched on grassland and snow mountains for 100 days, exactly 100 days. There were no trees or other human beings. We followed compasses and the stars for directions. On December 1, 1951 (we started the march on July 1, 1951) we got to Lhasa. Actually we got there on December 25. After we arrived, we took a break in Shenglitang in the east of Lhasa for a week, and afterwards we entered Lhasa to meet with the 18th Army in victory. We had a big celebration for our victory in entering Tibet. The central committee sent us a telegram of congratulations. The whole world knows this.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by "go separately?"   

**A:**  Going separately through different routes? Yes. One started from Chengdu, and passed Xikang. At the time, Xikang was a province. From Xikang, to the Kanba la [Erlang Mountains], Chamdo, then passing the Hengduan Mountains, to Tibet. They started from Chengdu, and traveled the southern route. We marched on the plateau, that is why we passed regions located at 4,000 or 5,000 km. above sea level. These were regions with no human traces. It was a forbidden region. We spent the entire 100 days in the snow mountains. On Feb., 10, 1952, the two TWCs got unified and formally set up a Tibetan Region Working Committee. It was like a party committee in a province in inland. Some people thought that the former two TWCs, the northwest TWC and the southwest TWC were the TWC later on. That is not true. The former TWCs were supposed to deal with the work of Tibet. On Feb. 10, 1952, the central committee set up a Working Committee of Tibetan Region. Zhang Guohua was its party secretary, I was the deputy party secretary. I was actually what they normally called the deputy secretary responsible for daily operations. There was no other deputy party secretary. Cadres from the two troops formed the political department, the propaganda department, and other departments,to form a complete province governing body. On Feb. 20, 1952, the Tibetan Military Headquarters was established.   

**Q:**  Are you too tired.   

**A:**  I am fine. Zhang Guohua was the Commander in the military headquarters, and Tan Guansan was the Political Commissar. I was the First Deputy Political Commissar. Wang Qimei was the Second Deputy Political Commissar. We appointed Ngabö and Ragashag as Deputy Commanders of the Tibetan Military Headquarters with the consent of the Dalai. When we reorganized the Tibetan Army, we merged the Tibetan troops with the Tibetan Military Headquarters, and used a whole bunch of Tibetan officers. We gave weapons of new models to the Tibetan army and salary to their officers. [Note: This did not happen].]   

**Q:**  After you got to Lhasa, there were different opinions among Kashag officials. Besides Ngabö, what kind of attitudes did they have when you dealt with them? How did you feel then?   

**A:**  It is hard to make it clear. When we first got to Tibet, the Tibetans viewed us as two troops. They called me Commander Pan [they pronounced Fan as Pan], and called Zhang Guohua Commander Zhang. My troops all wore yellow uniform and were equipped with sub-machine guns. The troops of the southwest were not equipped with good weapons. Our troops also had carbines from the Korean War. They knew our troops were Peng Dehuai's troops. They had their intelligence system. After we unified together, they no longer viewed us as two troops. They tried many things to sow dissension between our two troops. They had spies and spread rumors. We did not fall prey to their tricks. They said, the Panchen was the third son of Chairman Mao. My troops all supported the Panchen. The southwest troops all supported the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Do you mean Tibetans said such things?   

**A:**  Yes. Besides in Lhasa, our troops were stationed along the national border line, in the north, up to Nagchuka; in the northwest, up to Ali; in the south, up to Pomi, Chayu, Shannan, and Shigatse. Our troops were in places along our borders with Nepal, Buthan, India, and in the northwest, at Ali, our border with Pakistan and Kashmir. Our troops entered Kashmir, Ali, and along border line with Nepal, India, Buthan. The troops were in places along the McMahon Line. We felt that we had settled there. In the Kashag, Lukhangwa was like a prime minister, and Lobsang Tashi too. Lukhangwa was a very stubborn person. They organized the "people's association." By March or April, we truly settled down in Tibet, and they felt they did not have much hope. They organized the "People's Association" to oppose the government. They aimed to drive out the Hans and have an independent Tibet.   

