# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0230.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Fan Ming  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** X' Xi'an, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Fan Ming  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 83  
**Date of Birth:** 1910  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Fan Ming was a Major-General in the 1st field army and a senior cadre in the Northwest Bureau. He was the overall commander of the northwest cavalry troops that entered Lhasa in December 1951 under the terms of the 17-Point Agreement, and then served as a senior cadre in the Tibet Work Committee (Ch. Xizang gongwei) until his arrest, expulsion from Lhasa and imprisonment in 1958. He was a strong supporter of the Panchen Lama and a strong opponent of Zhang Guohua and the Tibet policy of Mao Zedong. In this interview he talks about the conflict in the party in Tibet between the northwest officials led by himself and the southwest officials led by Zhang Guohua.   

---  
### Tape 4  

---

**Q:**  If they did not follow that policy line, what do you think would have happened?   

**A:**  There would have been no such big rebellion and the Dalai would not have escaped. I am sure about this. Zhang Guohua and others were deceived. The day before the Dalai escaped, he was still writing to them saying nice things. They were all tricked by him.   

**Q:**  What you said makes sense. In 1956, a prince of Sikkim had a nice relationship with the Dalai and the Dalai wrote a letter and asked this prince to pass it to the United States government, indicating in the letter that he was concerned about his safety, that he would like to set up some relationship with the US government, and he would like to go to the US if possible.   

**A:**  I knew all these things. I had all these materials. When they had a meeting and wrote their plan in an evening, I could get it the next morning. That information that I collected still exist. After the Dalai escaped, they accused me of driving the Dalai away. What was even worse, when the Dalai rebelled, they tried hard to accused Panchen as a rebel. They put the Panchen in prison for nine years. When I was there, I said the Panchen was patriotic. Now that Dalai rebelled, and they tried to cover their own mistakes, so they had to put the Dalai and the Panchen together. They made false charges against the Panchen and made the Panchen a rebel too. They said when they searched Panchen's house, they captured the Panchen's plan of rebellion from under a table for religious purposes. They said I was the one who made this rebellion plan for the Panchen. This material is still in the TWC. I said to them that they got me out of Tibet in 1958, and they said that the plan was made in 1962, so as I was not a saint or someone with magic power, how could I possibly accomplish such a thing? I am patriotic, that's why I tell him [Goldstein] these secrets. There are other things that involve deeper party secrets, but I have to stop here. This is point one. The second point is please tell him that when he uses the information I give him, be very, very careful. As a scholar, he needs to know the crucial information, and without such information, he cannot get things clear. It is not reliable to write according to one's judgement or speculation. I am familiar with history and willing to be responsible for history. I never lie. Another point is that I am giving him all these information, materials and pictures, all for free. I hope he will protect those things about the Panchen. I hope that he will take good care of these things. These are extremely precious materials. Even the central committee does not have those pictures. The whole point is to protect the unification of our country, and thoroughly reveal the true nature of the Dalai. It is not for myself. There is this thing about Panchen. We should protect what we need to protect. Please make it clear to him.   

**Q:**  Thank you very much. He is very interested in what you told him. As a scholar, he hopes to record and reconstruct history according to the truth. He will follow the several points you told him just now. He will be careful and cautious when he uses the information and pictures you give him. He says he is truly thankful to you. He says he has traveled such a long way to interview you because he wants to reconstruct history according to the truth. He thanks you for giving him all the materials and telling him all these things.   

**A:**  All these materials are priceless. There is no way that they can be purchased by US dollars. I don't sell them for money, but there is this thing about Panchen.   

**Q:**  He promises to take good care of the material and he will send back the pictures after he shoot a duplicate set of them himself. Could you please give me your address and zip code?   

