# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0230.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Fan Ming  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Xi'an, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Fan Ming  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1910  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Fan Ming was a Major-General in the 1st field army and a senior cadre in the Northwest Bureau. He was the overall commander of the northwest cavalry troops that entered Lhasa in December 1951 under the terms of the 17-Point Agreement, and then served as a senior cadre in the Tibet Work Committee (Ch. Xizang gongwei) until his arrest and imprisonment starting in 1958 for being Tibet's greatest rightest and the head of an anti-party group. He discusses why he was a strong supporter of the Panchen Lama and a strong opponent of the Dalai Lama, Zhang Guohua and the Tibet policy of Mao Zedong. In this interview he talks in detail about the conflict between the northwest officials led by himself and the southwest officials led by Zhang Guohua over the role and status of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama.   

---  
### Tape 3  

---

**A:**  Three points in secret side agreement (Tib. ཟུར་ཡིག) of 17-point Agreement were: 1. The guns and ammunition captured in Chamdo war should be given back to the Tibetan government 2. Concerning the transformation of Tibetan army, the transformation was to occur, but not at first. After some time it will be gradually done. 3. Concerning Tibetan paper money, this will be gradually eliminated. We will buy it up with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> silver coins. On the status of the "representatives" (Ch. dai biao; Tib. སྐུ་ཚབ). In March [actually from his photograph the date was Feb 27, 1951] the Northwest Military Administrative Committee's (Tib. མགསི་ཨུཡོན་ལྷེངང), the 38th (meeting) settled that I would be its representative (Ch. dai biao) to Panchen Lama. In April, I began to do that work and I went to Siling to meet the Panchen Lama. During the Qing Dynasty's time there was the custom of a Front [Ch. qian zang] and Back Tibet [Ch. hou zang]. During the Qing time the Kashag and Panchen's office had equal status. The Qing emperor gave the Kashag government a gold seal and the Panchen's administrative committee a seal made from turquoise. And the Tibetan people say the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama are like the Sun and Moon. From the 6th Panchen's time, there has been the custom of the Panchen Lamas liking China and being advocates of unity with the nation (China). And particularly, the 10th Panchen was an adherent of national unity. Also, on all China's maps Front [Ch. qian zang] and Back Tibet [Ch. hou zang] were marked. Liu Buozhang and Deng Xiaoping they started the Bod ljong las don u yon lhan khang (Tibet Administrative Committee). So they went to Tibet via Xikang. This committee and our Northwest uyon lhankhang were at the level of a Xinjin [county] in rank. This was settled in the 17-Point Agreement where it says that the Dalai Lama and Panchen will have their old statuses [On the conflict in Tibet with <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>: We had a meeting with Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi. Phünwang was the interpreter. Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and I went to the negotiations. It was the time of Mönlam for the Tibetans. After the peaceful liberation of Tibet, there was the question of hanging the national flag. We asked the Kashag to raise the national flag. This was a trigger question. Lukhangwa said openly: "We have our own snow mountain and lion flag; our Tibetan country has our own snow mountain and lion flag. This is our own national flag, we have our own national flag." We told them they could not hang their flag. They argued that if the People's Liberation Army came to Tibet for the purpose of national defense, all the People's Liberation Army troops should go to the national border areas, no People's Liberation Army troops should stay in Lhasa. They asked us to send all of our troops out of Lhasa. This was their second condition. The third point they made was that they did not have any grain supplies for us. Around these question, we had a severe struggle with them. We argued with them, but none of the problems were solved. We had the second negotiation with them, and it did not work. So we went to Dalai. Dalai started to have an ambiguous attitude. And just at the time, when none of the problems were solved, the "people's association" started rebellion. We tried to protect the TWC. I was in the TWC. We thought of a kind of tactics so we asked all the Kalöns.  

**Q:**  You mean the representatives of the "people's association?"   

**A:**  No, we had nothing to do with them. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, in Tibetan, Kalön is the prime minister,   

**Q:**  Ziben?   

**A:**  No, all these people, Ngabö was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, as was Surkhang. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was Kalön, there was another title, what was it? What was the title for those eight officials under the Kalöns? What was their official titles?  

**Q:**  Lobsang Tashi and Lukhangwa.   

**A:**  They were the prime ministers.   

**Q:**  One prime minister and one deputy prime minister.   

**A:**  No. One religious and one lay. Those two headed eight officials under them. What was their title?   

**Q:**  kashag.   

**A:**  Kashag. This was the minister, and the higher level was the prime minister. The prime minister was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, and under them there were those ministers, eight of them, they were the Kashag [Note: they were the 4 trunyichemmo and the 4 tsipön]. We asked them to come to the TWC for a discussion. We told them that rebellions were going to start, and we asked them to consider that. Ngabö gave us some information we needed, we also had our own intelligence system. They were going to have a rebellion, they were going to surround us. I did not tell them that we had our information system. I was in charge of that work. So We invited all the Kashag to come to our place for a discussion. At the discussion, they said that the local government had nothing to do with the "people's association." We told them it was an illegal organization, and that the Kashag should try to stop its activities. We informed them that if the rebels wanted to fight with us, we could certainly fight with them,and this would not be difficult for us. But we would like to avoid battles, and for the purpose of ethnic unity, we would definitely not fight the first gun shot. Chairman Mao made this very clear to us: never fight and fire the first gunshot. Only after they shot at us, could we fire back. It did not mean we could not fight with them, but we definitely could not fight the first shot to them. This was an absolute rule in the ethnic policy of the communist party. These Kashag officials tried to withdraw from the issue. So we said to them: "you send out two representatives to calm down the riots, and to withdraw all the Tibetan army soldiers, the rest of you please stay with us. After everything gets calm down, the rest of you may leave." They sent out Luishar and Surkhang, and the first rebellion was put down. On the next day, we let the rest of them leave. After this, those rebels continued their activities. They went to Shannan to do things against us. Under such circumstances, we had another negotiation with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>. Lukhangwa was very stubborn. He said that Kashag never acknowledged the Agreement. He broke the Agreement. He refused to recognize the agreement and to hang the national flag. We firmly demanded that Lukhangwa should be dismissed from his position, since the central government had sovereignty in Tibet. We talked with the Dalai to dismiss Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi from their positions. Then they were dismissed from their positions. In reality, they continued to organize their exile government. They continued their activities with Chushigandru. They conducted rebellion in Xikang where land reform was underway. They conducted rebellion in other places, but they did not dare to conduct rebellion in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Do you mean that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and his group conducted the rebellion?   

**A:**  No, they were commanding the rebellions behind the scene. Things got stable for a while after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and Lobsang Tashi were dismissed from their positions. We started economic construction in Tibet, building power plants and schools, and giving loans to farmers, et cetera. We made the masses feel safe and secure. At the time, the Panchen already got back to Tibet. In 1952, the Tibetan army and Panchen's battalion of guards had a competition of arrow shooting on horse backs during the Tibetan New Year, and they had confrontations. Soon afterwards, troops of the 18th Army that were stationed in Shigatse had confrontation with the Panchen's troops too. This was due to different ideas about the position of the Panchen and the Dalai within our party. One group tried to put down the Panchen, to put the Panchen under the Kashag. There was a big policy problem regarding this. They put the Panchen's battalion of guards under the military command of Zhang Guohua's 18th army, and withdrew all the guards for the Panchen and Che Jigme. This was an internal problem-- I don't have to hide this--a problem between the northwest and southwest. The problem of unity within the party affected the troops, so the 18th army supported the Dalai and the northwest troops supported the Panchen.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the masses?   

**A:**  The masses' problem was our problem. It was a big mistake we made in Tibet. So later on, when situations turned out like that in Tibet, it served us right. From the very beginning, different opinions existed within the party. Later on they called it "factions," or opinions of a certain group -- opinions of the northwest and the southwest, the Dalai and the Panchen. When the question of the Dalai and the Panchen came into the party, the party was divided into the northwest and the southwest. At the time, I was still the representative in the Panchen's administration. When the same problem was reflected among the masses [non-party members], the northwest troops protected and supported the Panchen, and the 18th army supported the Dalai. The division was like this among ourselves. I need to tell him [Goldstein], maybe he does not know where the real problem was. The mistakes started from this time. A crucial point in our internal problems was, in reality, a big mistake in the party policy. This was very typical. The policy of the central committee was very clear: a united front of patriotism and anti-imperialism and to make it a main task to win over the Dalai's group and firmly unite with the Panchen's patriotic group. The policy of the central committee was very correct. The central committee insisted om unifying Tibet through peaceful means. These were the basic policies of Tibet. The central committee was in fact very clear in its Tibetan policy. At this time, the Panchen was not under the leadership of Kashag, he was still under the leadership of the central committee. The central committee treated the Dalai and the Panchen in the same way. These were all decided by the central committee. When the Panchen wrote reports or other things, he did not go through the TWC or the Dalai, he passed his writing directly to the central committee. He was a small religious leader and the Dalai was a big religious leader. That was it. At the time, big disputes and difference in opinions occurred within the party regarding the peaceful unification of Tibet. They later said there were mistakes in Tibet, the mistakes started from here.   

**Q:**  Just now you said <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was going to hang the snow mountain and lion flag, where was he going to hang it?   

**A:**  To hang it in his government, in the Kashag. He gave no permission to hang the national flag. After we solved the problem of the "people's association," we hoisted the national flag. The Tibetan Army had to carry our national flag and their own flag. After the problems of "people's association," and the dismissal of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>, disputes occurred within our party about the peaceful unification of Tibet. Compared with what I am going to tell you next, what I said just now was only a prelude. In the policy of the peaceful unification of Tibet, a difference of opinions occurred within the party. There were two kinds of opinions. One group was headed by me, was the northwest group. We had more experience in doing ethnic work. We had many years of experience. They [the southwest] had no experience in this area. Regarding the policy of the peaceful unification of Tibet, we believed the region of Shigatse and the region of Chamdo should be used [the Chamdo region did not return to Kashag after liberation]. We wanted to use these two progressive and patriotic regions to influence the Dalai's group, to urge them to be progressive and patriotic, and to help Dalai's group become a patriotic group instead of a pro-independent group that would go against our country. With the leadership of the central committee and the influence of the two progressive regions, we [believed] we could change the Dalai's group, and change the Kashag into a patriotic group. In this way, we could unify the regions of Shigatse and Chamdo with the region of Lhasa and unify Tibet as a whole, into a new Tibet. This was our idea. The group headed by Zhang Guohua listened to the opinions of Ngabö and others, and believed that in order to build a unified Tibet through peaceful means, we had to put the Panchen's group and the region of Chamdo under the Kashag, the Dalai's group. That meant to unify the Panchen's group and Chamdo under the unpatriotic, pro-independent Kashag, that is, to sacrifice [the Panchen's group] in exchange for a unified Tibet under the Dalai. This was the root of all the problems. Disputes occurred within the party and there were no solution for a while. Just at the time, in December, 1952, the Dalai's Tibetan army had confrontations with the Panchen's guards, with the involvement of the 18th army. Under such an emergency, the central committee, Chairman Mao, sent me a telegram, asking me to rush to Shigatse ASAP. It took me six days, with a squad of soldiers, to get to Shigatse, and I resolved the confrontation. Things returned to normal. It was peaceful and quiet again. However, while I was in Shigatse, they -- Zhang Guohua and Zhang Jingwu, used the name of the TWC to send me a telegram. In the telegram, he asked me and my deputy representative, Ya Hanzhang, to persuade the Panchen to surrender to the Kashag unconditionally. Ya Hanzhang was a representative in the Panchen's traveling administration, not a deputy representative.   

**Q:**  I know him.   

**A:**  Ya Hanzhang also accompanied the Panchen to Shigatse. He was the general secretary of the TWC. We asked him not to return to Lhasa for the time being, and he helped the Panchen to restore his original power and prestige. When we got to Shigatse this time as representative and deputy representative, we gathered the officials of the Panchen and talked with them about patriotism, unity, internal unity among Tibetans, mutual respect with the Dalai's group, et cetera. We resolved the confrontations and everything was fine again. Then they sent me this telegram, urging Ya Hanzhang and me to persuade the Panchen to surrender to the Kashag unconditionally, thus to complete the unification of Tibet. There was this written document. We believed that the Panchen could only unify with a patriotic Kashag, not a pro-independence Kashag. If we sent the two progressive regions to this pro-separation Kashag, we were actually helping them. We would hurt our friends and help our enemies. We did not agree with the telegram. We sent a telegram to the central committee with their telegram attached. We talked with Chairman Mao about the problem. Chairman Mao seriously criticized Zhang Guohua. Chairman Mao also criticized Zhang Guohua for dismissing the Panchen's battalion of guards without the permission of Chairman Mao. The Panchen's battalion of guards had been set up by the central committee, so how could Zhang simply dismiss them and take them into his own troops? It was wrong doing without discipline. Chairman Mao criticized Zhang Guohua very seriously. From then on, they truly hated us. Each time when it came to things like distributing weapons or recreational things, they would treat the Panchen's group as a part of Dalai's group, not as a parallel group under the direct leadership of the central committee. The problem became more and more serious. In 1953, we went to Beijing for the Tibetan Work Conference. Because of those confrontations in our work in Tibet, the meeting was jokingly called the "Panmunjang Meeting." [after the peace negotiations in Korea]. At this meeting, I suggested establishing the Preparatory Committee of the Tibetan Autonomous Region. This was my idea. The Preparatory Committee of the Tibetan Autonomous Region actually coordinated the unification issue. In this committee, the Dalai was the director, and the Panchen was the deputy director, and Phagbala and Zhang Guohua were also the deputy directors. This committee eased the confrontations. In 1954, the First National People's Congress was going to hold its first meeting. The first Constitution was born. Delegations of the Dalai and the Panchen went to Beijing separately. Zhang Jingwu and the Dalai's delegation traveled through Chamdo, Chengdu, and went to Beijing via the southwest. The Panchen's delegation and I started from Lhasa and repeated the route when we march into Tibet some years ago, from Xining to Lanzhou, and to Xi'an. On the way, we followed the all traditional route and traditional rules for the Panchen to go to Beijing. The train and hotels were decorated with yellow fringes according to the historical practice. In Xi'an, the two delegations met and went to Beijing together. In Beijing, the Commander-in-chief [Ch. Zhu De] and Premier Zhou Enlai went to the railway station to welcome the Dalai and the Panchen. The Dalai was elected the Vice Chairman of the First National People's Congress, and the Panchen was elected the Vice Chairman of the National Political Consultative Committee. The problem of unification was solved. The Dalai was damned happy and tried to show how progressive he was -- he loved the motherland, he was progressive, he even wanted to join the communist party! All these were false. You know all these. However, he fooled some people. They believed that the Dalai was a statesman, that he loved the motherland, et cetera. They believed that Dalai was truly a patriotic and progressive leader. Under such circumstances, the Dalai secretly held a meeting of "Greater Tibet" [Ch. da zhang zou gui]." "Da zhang" means to try to see the response of somebody. Phünwang also attended the meeting. We found out their secret and we reported to the central committee about their secret meeting. Who revealed the secret in the first place? It was Huang Zhengqing [Tib. ཨབ་ཨལོ]. They did not invite the Panchen's people to the meeting, but they invited the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ་བ] A person from Amdo.">Amdowa</a> Huang Zhengqing. Huang had a good relationship with me. He told me the secret. This did not cause the central committee to be alert about them. After the meeting, everyone returned to Tibet. Very soon, it was the time of the anniversary of the Buddha's nirvana [the Buddha Jayanti]. I will finish this part soon. The Dalai deceived us by behaving himself in a leftist way: he believed in communism, he wanted to join the communist party, et cetera. He cheated the policy makers. The policy makers were cheated. There were rumors in Lhasa that we were holding Dalai as a hostage. So we let the Dalai and the Panchen return to Tibet [from India] soon. The Dalai was believed to be patriotic and progressive when he left for Tibet. So he got himself a pretentious mask. After he got back to Tibet, the Dalai sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> to India as a pilgrim. In reality, he sent Lukhangwa to India to organize his exile government and military forces. I was a professional in doing intelligence work, and I was clear about all these things, however, they just did not believe me. They did not believe me. When the anniversary [the Buddha Jayanti] came, the Dalai asked to go to India for the occasion. It was like a pilgrimage, like those who go to Jerusalem. Because the central committee trusted him so much, they agreed to let him go. We asked to let Panchen go to India too. The Dalai did not want the Panchen to go with him, because he had made his traveling plans in advance. We argued with Dalai's group that since they were going for this big religious occasion, and the Dalai and the Panchen were the sun and the moon, so why not let the Panchen go together? So they had to accept the idea. Then they two both went to India. The minute Dalai got to India, he changed. With support from Nehru, the Dalai was busy organizing his Tibetan country. The Dalai's brother openly raised the question of Tibetan independence to us, and he was firm that Dalai was not coming back. They got everything ready for an exile government. Dalai was not coming back. They also surrounded the Panchen and persuaded the Panchen to stay with them, and not to return to Tibet, and to join their exile government. The Panchen was firmly against their ideas and was firm that he would come back. Because of this, Nehru was rude to the Panchen on many occasions. He put the Dalai and the Panchen in different kinds of cars, and the Panchen's car would stop somewhere on the way, et cetera. Nehru was very bad. Nehru did all these things, and the Dalai became firm that he would not come back. He openly claimed to establish the Tibetan nation. Under such circumstances, Premier Zhou Enlai arrived in India. He said to Nehru, "You cannot interfere in our internal affairs." Nehru withdrew from this issue. Gyalo Thondup went to argue with Premier Zhou as a representative of the Dalai, and Premier Zhou severely condemned his arguments. The Dalai said he would not return to Tibet. So we decided that the Panchen would go back to Tibet first. If Dalai did not come back, and the Panchen came back, Tibet would be the same. We could still build a new Tibet. So the Panchen came back and we sent the Panchen to Shigatse. The Dalai's group saw the Panchen return to Tibet, and things became unfavorable to them. They had secret information. If they did not come back and the Panchen returned, the Panchen could replace the Dalai. The Panchen replaced the 12th Dalai who betrayed the country. They were afraid that if they did not come back, we would make a decision to get the Panchen to Lhasa and unify the whole Tibet. Considering this, plus our work through diplomatic means and other ways,the Dalai came back. This is a only brief description. The complexity of the struggle can make a good novel. I won't go into those details. After the Dalai came back, he pretended that he was a nice guy. He pretended that when he was in India, all the bad things were actually done by those Tibetans in exile in India. He was a pathetic guy, who was used like a puppet. He said he tried very hard to get rid of those bad guys around him, and get rid of his armed forces, and he tried very hard to come back. In fact, when he came back, he was going to organize big rebellions, but on the surface, he pretended he was a nice person. He repeated those things he said in Beijing, that he loved the motherland, et cetera. And his sweet words fooled our comrades Zhang Guohua and others again. They fell prey to his tricks again. When the Dalai asked to get certain things done to Panchen, they would just do it. When the Dalai asked for something, they satisfied him. For example, regarding the issue of the Tibetan currency, before the currency reform, the Dalai asked for money from the central government and they gave him seven million. He asked for weapons, and they gave him many weapons. We had arguments about these things. We said this was not right. All the evidence showed that he was coming back to organize a rebellion. At this time, he organized <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> -- "the Four Rivers and Six Mountains." He gathered leaders of the armed rebels of Kham, those who were arrested by us, in the Potala Palace and in Norbulinga. They organized a "Fun Party on Sundays." To the outside, it was just a group who would get together and enjoy themselves, having dinners and recreational activities together. In reality, when it became deep into night, it became an organization which planned and prepared for rebellion. Around Lhasa, in seven places including Tengchen, and Zoukang, rebellions had started already. They already wiped out several People's Liberation Army companies. Under such circumstances, Zhang Guohua and his group covered up the hard facts and pressed not to report these things to the central committee. I reported these things to the central committee. It was 1957. In December, 1957 the central committee gave an order to the TWC, asking the TWC to discuss the political situation in Tibet. In 1957, Tibet was like this: the rebellion had not formally started yet, but they were not patriotic at all. We discussed the situation and held an extended meeting of the TWC. It was a big meeting. We discussed at the meeting that since Tibet had now become chaotic like this, what was the nature of the Tibetan problem? The difference between them and us was difference in party line. We believed that the Tibetan problem at the time was a question of unification or separation. It was a confrontation between enemies and us. We believed that the Dalai was going to launch a rebellion, he was trying to separate Tibet from the motherland and we wanted unification of the motherland. So the main confrontation between the Dalai and us was around unification or separation. Zhang Guohua and his group stubbornly insisted that the problem of Tibet at the time was just an ethnic problem. It was a problem between Hans and Tibetans. But there was no problem between Hans and Tibetans, either in administration or in the question of ethnic equality. There was no such problem at all. Our relationship with Tibetans was quite good. After we got to Tibet, the living standards of Tibetans improved. We argued about these questions. With a big difference in party line, we had a big dispute within the party committee. According to all the information that I had -- documents and their rebellion plan, I brought everything to the table. Was the Dalai going to launch a rebellion? My answer was yes. He definitely was going to do it. I backed up my argument with all the evidence: their rebellion plan, they again organized the "people's association," their leaders of an exile government, and their plan for military action. I brought up all the evidence. They said that I was making a false charge against the great patriotic leader, and filed a charge against me to the central committee. As a result, in April 1958, at the extended TWC meeting of cadres, they accused me of being the "leader of the right, anti-party group." They accused me of being a counter-revolutionary, a leader of an anti-party group, a big right winger. They made my wife a right winger too. They also made the cadres that I brought to Tibet from the northwest right wingers, including the Director of Personnel and Party Organization Dept. More that 600 cadres went to Tibet with me from the northeast. They got rid of all those cadres, they killed them or kicked them out. They kicked me out of the party, out of the army, and sent me to a labor camp. Later on, they added another crime to me: "the black aide to Peng Dehuai." They forced me to Jiayu where I worked in a labor camp for seven years. I was also in prison for 13 years. My crime, they said, was to humiliate, to attack and to make false charges against the Dalai, a great patriotic leader, and a leader of our country. They held cadre meetings, accused me and criticized me at 100 of those meetings. But I was not wrong. They did not have any evidence against me, so they created a false report, accusing me of 15 crimes. It was a false report, and they sent it to the central committee. They said that I was nurturing factionalism within the party, and even extending that to the Dalai, and that I was making false charges against the Dalai, et cetera. They said I had wild individual ambition to unify Tibet, et cetera. From April to August, all together 100 days, they accused me and criticized me, and eventually, they made a conclusion of my case: to sent me to a labor camp in the Changbai Mountains. Later on, they said I was trying to reverse the verdict, so they imprisoned me for 13 more years. There was this prison in Beijing where Jiang Qing was imprisoned. I was imprisoned there for 13 years.   

**Q:**  Qingcheng Prison?   

**A:**  Qingcheng Prison. I was imprisoned there for thirteen years, from 1962 to 1975, for thirteen years. In 1975, Comrade Xiaoping resumed work for a while, and I was released. After my release, I continued to do forced labor in a labor camp. In 1980 my problem was eventually solved, and I got back my party membership. Let's not talk about my problems. The most serious mistake was the separation [difference of opinions] within the party. I insisted that the Dalai was going to rebel. I told them that they might not believe it, but I had the evidence. They still did not believe me. Because I gave them such warning, the central committee made me a counter-revolutionary. They accused me of humiliating, attacking, and making false charges against the Dalai, a great patriotic leader, a statesmen. When I was leaving Lhasa, I was tied up and everything. Guards stood in lines, ready to escort us out of Tibet. Before I got into the vehicle, I handed Wang Qimei the Dalai's rebellion plan and his traveling route [to exile]. I said a few very sad words to him. I said that no matter what, the reality was like this [about the Dalai's plan]. I said there was a Chinese proverb: when brothers fought with each other, they could not defend themselves against outside invasion. I meant when we were fighting among ourselves, the Dalai was going to hurt the country, he was going to rebel. They said, damned you. You get out of here. We can unite with the Dalai Lama, and you, a counter-revolutionary, do not have to care about this. Then they locked me up into the car. It was just like that. In November, they sent me back to Lintong in Shanxi. My family lived in Dongguan, southwest of the city. In March 1959, suddenly, Dalai rebelled. I was at the time completely a common person. I was not allowed to get any internal information. My salary was reduced from Level Seven to a common person's income: several dozens of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> every month. I read a newspaper, and saw the news of the rebellion. The Dalai's traveling route and the places he stayed were all in the written material that I gave them before I left. I gave them the information and they did not believe me. The information is still buried in the files of the TWC today. I have tried twice to get the material back, but no matter what, I could not get it. No one dares to take it out now, I mean the information about Dalai's plan that I provided them before I left Tibet. After they brought me down, Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua apologized to the Dalai at a big meeting, saying to him that they had already gotten rid of Fan Ming, a real bad guy and everything, and that the central committee already sent Fan Ming to a labor camp. This was a very interesting story indeed. Zhang Guohua and two others went to tell the Dalai that they had taken me down, and had put me into a prison's car and sent me away. Why would they do this to me? Because I was against the Dalai. In this way, they praised the Dalai in a high position. When they announced the treatment to me at the big meeting, the Dalai heard it and he jumped up with joy. Before that, when I was present at a meeting, the Dalai saw me and he felt like sitting on needles. He would be sweating all over if I gave him a look. I saw through him, and I knew his secrets. Now, I was gone, it was all over. The Dalai said that please tell the central committee and Chairman Mao that from then on he would follow the central committee, he would not do anything like separating Tibet from China or rebellion. The central committee congratulated Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua for winning a big victory in Tibet, and for getting the situation stabilized in Tibet. Then when Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua went to Hangzhou, Tibet was left only to Tan Guansan. Tan Guansan was a good person, he used to be an elementary school teacher. He was a good person. There was no doubt about that,but he did not know how to fight and he did not understand politics. He was an old red army soldier. The Dalai's group took this opportunity to launch a rebellion. After the rebellion occurred, Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua returned to Beijing. The People's Liberation Army in the headquarters were almost all wiped out. Peng Dehuai was the Minister of National Defense, and he stationed my troops in Germu to construct the city of Germu. This was Peng's strategic plan. At Germu, it was easy for the troops to go out to attack or to stay and defend the place. The idea was to defend the country from invasion from India and to prepare for a rebellion in Tibet. It was a People's Liberation Army base. So the troops for reinforcing Tibet were in Germu (Golmud). Peng Dehuai gave the order to reinforce Tibet. The troops ran for three days and three nights, and when they got to Tibet, there were only 4,000 soldiers left out of troops of more than 10,000 soldiers. How could such troops fight?   

