# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0035.01  
##  : with Thönsur Lobsang Tenzin [Tib. ཐོན་ཟུར་བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་འཛིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 21 April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:**  Thönsur Lobsang Tenzin [Tib. ཐོན་ཟུར་བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་འཛིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 67  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thönsur [Tib. ཐོན་ཟུར] was an aristocratic lay official from a branch of the Thönbo family. In this interview, he discusses how the Chinese collected food and fodder from Kongpo when they first came in 1949. He talks about being appointed as the Governor of Northern Tibet (Changji) in 1958 and his relations with the Chinese and Chushigandru. Thönsur also mentions the presence of Tibetan government guns and ammunition stored in Nagchu. He also discussed how he personally helped a Chushigandru Commander on his own estate in Lhoka. And he talks about his imprisonment for 20 years and how he suffered from struggle sessions in prison.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0035_01/H_0035_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Where were you living in 1951? Were you in Lhasa? When you heard that the Chinese were coming, did they reach Kongpo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese arrived at Lhasa, how was the situation and how were the government officials and your relatives talking about that?   

**A:**  When I went to Kongpo, the Chinese had already arrived at Kongpo. I went to Kongpo in the year 1951.   

**Q:**  When you just got there, they had already arrived in that place, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they had arrived there before that, and a small number of Chinese also were staying in Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ]. In Kongpo, there were several <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> (districts) such as Tsegang [Tib. རྩེ་སྒང], Jomo [Tib. ཇོ་མོ], Shokha [Tib. ཞོ་ཁ], and Giamda. Altogether there were 4 dzong in Kongpo. At that time, the Chinese were staying in Giamda permanently. Tsegang Dzong was located in the lower part of Kongpo and there was also a small number of Chinese staying there. There were officials who were leaders [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and cadres, and there were also soldiers. At that time, since they had just arrived, they didn't have anything that would be beneficial for Tibet. They were just staying there and they needed food for their people and fodder for their horses and mules. So the districts like Tsegang and Giamda collected from the rich households in that area flour for the [Chinese] people, beans for the fodder and hay for their animals and gave it to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese were there at that time?   

**A:**  I don't remember the exact number of the Chinese. Among the Chinese living in Giamda, some of them were staying there permanently and some of them were [passing through] going up to Lhasa and going down to Kongpo. Similarly, the Chinese staying in Kongpo also didn't stay there permanently and they went to on to Dakpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ]. Kongpo and Dakpo were adjacent and some of them were also going to Lhoka. At that time, the Chinese arrived everywhere including in Lhasa. So the Tibetan Government supplied them food and fodder and, as I mentioned above, the food and the fodder was collected from the households that had the means and then were given to the Chinese. This was called yödön [Tib. ཡོད་འདོན] or "giving from those who had.". As soon as the Chinese arrived in Tibet, market prices increased rapidly. Normally, we only needed to spend the things that the Tibetans needed and we didn't need to spend anything for the foreigners. When many Chinese soldiers and civil cadres came to Tibet, the market prices increased rapidly.   

**Q:**  Did the price increase in Kongpo also?   

**A:**  Yes. Furthermore, at that time there was an earthquake in Kongpo. It occurred in the year 1949, when the Chinese entered Tibet and it caused severe damage to the fields and many people and animals died. While the people were facing this kind of hardship, the Chinese came up. Therefore, the Kongpo area had to face more hardship. After the Chinese came, they did only bad things.   

**Q:**  Were there any non-military Chinese at that time?   

**A:**  At that time, the majority were soldiers because it was the beginning and in order to occupy the place, they used force and they also used suppression [Tib. དྲག་གནོན] to make the Tibetans sign the 17-Point Agreement. That was not signed willingly from both sides. They just held a gun and bullied them [the Tibetan delegates] and said, "Aren't you going to sign it?" If you don't, we are going to shoot you." After that, the Chinese sent a lot of troops everywhere under the pretext of the 17-Point Agreement. At that time, most of the soldiers were sent to the borders and occupied Tibet by force. Since the Chinese had come, they caused hardship for both the government and the people (miser).   

**Q:**  How big was Kongpo Giamda? Were there many households and shops?   

**A:**  Giamda was an important place on the road. When people would come from Kham, they definitely had to go through Giamda. It was a kind of crossroads, but the village was not that big and it was also not a very small village. There was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> (district headquarters) in that place.   

**Q:**  Were the people living in Giamda native people or were there <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders living there?   

**A:**  The people living in Giamda were native Kongpo people. They were all Kongpo nationality from the four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> in the Kongpo area. But there might be a few people from outside. The majority were Kongpo people.   

**Q:**  What did you do after that in Kongpo? In the Water Dragon year, the People's Association, the Mimang Tshogpa was set up in Lhasa. Was there any similar event in Kongpo?   

**A:**  I didn't hear about any. In general, Lhasa was a very big city and it was also the capital of the country of Tibet. So the mental understanding of the people there was also slightly different. Anyway, they had the political comprehension. They had that from early times. It was not the case that they had it in recent times. In the ancient times, there were also many similar events. They were not educated like in modern times, but it had become a traditional example [Tib. དམིགས་རྒྱུན] [passed on] from generation to generation. They knew that Tibet was a country and the political power was the most important thing for the country. Even nowadays, peaceful resistance against the Chinese is continuously taking place. I was imprisoned for 20 years, but they didn't beat me with the electric prods. I was imprisoned for 20 years from 1959. In 1950's, the People's Association [Mimang Tshogpa] made a document and delivered it Zhang Jingwu saying that the Chinese invaded Tibet. But I never heard about the people in Kongpo having any connection with the People's Association in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Do you have any details to tell us about the People's Association.   

**A:**  At the time I went to Kongpo, I also stayed 3 years in my homeland [in Lhoka]. So I don't have anything to tell you in detail about the "people".   

**Q:**  You came to Lhasa for a short time and then went back to Kongpo, right?   

**A:**  I went to Kongpo in 1951 and stayed there for the year 1952. In 1953, I came back to Lhasa. In the middle of 1954, after the Dalai Lama went to China, I returned to my home [estate] in Lhoka and stayed there for three years. During that period, I didn't do much work for the government.   

**Q:**  I heard you went to Lhasa in 1957, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you do after that? At that time, the Dalai Lama had returned from India, right?   

**A:**  Yes, my three year term was over and I came to Lhasa to work. At that end of 1957, I was appointed as the Changji or Governor of Northern Tibet. There were many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> (districts) under the Changji. My colleague [co-governor] was Mentöpa [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད་པ]. I went to the north at the beginning of 1958 so I didn't have much time to stay there.   

**Q:**  When you went to the north, were the dzongs managed (shungdzin [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན]) by the government?   

**A:**  As soon as I got there, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>s were managed by the government. When I was appointed as the Changji, I was told that the dzongs were managed by the government. When I went there, all of the income was delivered to the government. We didn't have any private income. This was very beneficial for the subjects (misers) because it was the idea of the Dalai Lama. At that time, the Dalai Lama gave the order and there was a [Tibetan government] office called Legjö or Reform Office. It was for reforming the old system. We can call it a revolution. At that time, the government officials were paid a salary according to one's title and the importance of the work. All the income of the dzongs and the estates were [therefore] delivered to the government. It was very beneficial for the subjects (misers) and they said that they are grateful to the government. Previously, when the dzongs were managed by the individual dzong heads, naturally, the subjects faced hardships.   

**Q:**  How much salary did the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱང་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet in the traditional era.">changji</a> get at that time?   

**A:**  The salary was not only money, there was also barley. At that time transportation was not that convenient, so we had to ride horses and take some servants with us. So the salary that was paid was also paid enough to cover the servants [who accompanied us]. I don't remember the exact amount of the salary because it has been many years. At that time, salaries were also paid to the officials who didn't have work.   

**Q:**  Approximately, did you get more than 500 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley or more than 1000 khe of barley?   

**A:**  The salary was paid according to the rank. I don't remember clearly.   

**Q:**  When you traveled back and forth, you had use of the horse corvée and the pack animals corvée, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It was in 1958 when you went to the north, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, was there a big Chinese regiment in Nagchu [Nagchuka]?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time in Nagchu there was the office of the Nagchu Prefecture [Ch. zhuan qu]. This meant the governor of Nagchu and they had their own leaders and soldiers and cadres. That year [1958] was when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> set up their organization in Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ]. They were named Chushigandru, but they were not exclusively comprised of Khambas. There were people from all three provinces [Tib. ཆོལ་ཁ་གསུམ], namely <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, Dotö and Dome. Tö was included in Ütsang. Dotö was where the Chushigandru were from [Kham] and Dome was Amdo. At that time, they were called the Tensung Tanglang Magar [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག་སྒར] or "the Volunteer Guardian Army of Religion." At that time they sent people everywhere and they came to Nagchu several times. Sometimes they made the Chinese have a hard time by destroying Chinese vehicles and killing their people and robbing their things.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1958?   

**A:**  Yes. After they set up their organization in Drigu, they sent people not only to Nagchu, they also sent people to Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ] and everywhere to attack the Chinese.   

**Q:**  I thought the Khambas got scattered after they got the weapons from Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] and they couldn't go to Nagchu.   

**A:**  There were many people. Those who went to Shang Ganden Chöngor were just one group. When I was there in Nagchu, they sent people from Drigu to Nagchu several times and they attacked the Chinese by waiting and ambushing the Chinese on the road. They attacked the Chinese and robbed whatever they had in their trucks.   

**Q:**  At that time, how many Chinese soldiers were there in Nagchu?   

**A:**  In Nagchu Prefecture, there were cadres and soldiers living permanently. I didn't know clearly the number of soldiers. At that time, soldiers were also coming from China because the road from Xining [Qinghai] went through Nagchu.   

**Q:**  Were there about 300 Chinese soldiers in Nagchu?   

**A:**  There weren't a large number of soldiers there. If there would be a large number, we would see them. But, at the same time it was not like just 5-6-10 soldiers. As you said, probably, there were several hundred, nut I can't tell you for sure. When the Chinese got attacked by the Tensung Tanglangmag, they were suspicious that the Changji and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> were linked together and the Chinese annoyed us every time and it was very strong. However, we actually didn't have any links together regarding attacking the Chinese. It was unnecessary for us to handle the Chushigandru,and we also didn't do that. We just let them attack . We let them do whatever they wanted to do.   

**Q:**  Normally, did you have relations with the Chinese officials?   

**A:**  Yes. Sometimes when there were meetings, they called us.   

**Q:**  What kind of meetings did they hold? You were doing your regular works with your colleague, right? Did you work with the Chinese collectively?   

**A:**  There wasn't anything that we had to do cooperatively and permanently with the Chinese. The Chinese were doing their work and we, the Tibetan Government, was doing our own work. Whenever there were some specials events like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> attacking the Chinese as I mentioned above, they would call us to the meeting and would say, "The Khambas are attacking us. Are you going to let them do this? Aren't you who are the local official working here? You have to teach them a lesson."   

**Q:**  Did you have Tibetan soldiers under the Changji?   

**A:**  Yes, we had our bodyguard soldiers, but not that many. We had about 25 well-equipped soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were they from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་དམག་སྒར]?   

**A:**  Yes. We had one platoon [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁག] from the Khadang [Trapchi] Regiment as our bodyguards. We also had an ammunition arsenal in Nagchu from the early times. There were Bren-guns and machine guns and probably there also was a canon and a lot of bullets. There were many English Carbines with long barrels [Tib. དབྱིན་ཇི་ཁ་རིང] which were the first ones bought [long ago] and there were also the 305 English Carbine [Tib. དབྱིན་ཇི་ཁ་ཐུང] which was made later and was said to be more effective. The reason why they kept the ammunition there was because this place was located at an important border area and the back side of Nagchu was adjacent with Chinese territory. So if we weren't om the alert for the enemy, it was quite dangerous. The weapons were left there from the early times and Tibetan Government kept it there until 1959.   

**Q:**  What were the Chinese doing at that time? Were they doing some military things because they have quite a lot of soldiers, or did they have relations with the people? Did they set up schools and hospitals in Nagchu?   

**A:**  Yes. There was a hospital. Probably, there was a school also, but I don't remember clearly. This was because I didn't stay for a long time in Nagchu. I got there in the 4th Tibetan month and came back [to Lhasa] in the 10th month. So I don't have any details to tell you. Anyway, the Chinese were staying there doing something for the Chinese who were coming up [to Tibet] and going down through that place. I didn't know what they were doing internally. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was opposing the Chinese everywhere, so the Chinese called meetings sometimes and publicized that Chushigandru is not behaving well and were robbing things.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you receive any orders from the Kashag telling you to hand over the weapons to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> or telling you not to hand over the weapons stored in the arsenal in Nagchu.   

**A:**  We didn't receive any special orders regarding this. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> also didn't come to us to get the weapons.   

**Q:**  Did the government tell you that if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> would come, do not hand over the weapons or did they agree to hand over the weapons to them?   

**A:**  There wasn't any special order. I am not sure whether <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> even knew about the weapons kept in Nagchu. The Khambas didn't dare to come to the place where we were staying. They were attacking the Chinese at a distance of one or two days journey from where we were staying.   

**Q:**  Did the leaders of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> come to make connections with you surreptitiously?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. But we were supporting them indirectly [Tib. ཤུགས་ཀྱིས].   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  The Chinese were telling us that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> is attacking us and robbing this and that, so you should punish them and you shouldn't let them do that." But we just said, "Yes, yes." But, we didn't tell the Khambas that you shouldn't do that to the Chinese. Even if we would have told them, they wouldn't have listened to us. At that time, we were on the government's side. So if we didn't act tactfully, it was not OK. This was the policy then. We were not openly linked with Chushigandru, but indirectly we had a kind of solidarity in terms of loyalty. [Tib. ལ་རྒྱ་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ]. Chushigandru also trusted us thinking that the Changji would treat them nicely and would never treat them badly. We also had never treated them badly.   

**Q:**  At that time, you people were much more knowledgeable than the ordinary people so when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was making war, did you think that they could just kill several Chinese, but there was no hope for driving the Chinese out from Tibet? Or did you think that Americans would help you and you would be able to drive out the Chinese?   

**A:**  At that time, what we were thinking was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was fighting against the Chinese voluntarily for the independence of Tibet. I thought that they were right to do that. But it was difficult for Chushigandru to drive out the Chinese right away, because there was a great different between the number [of soldiers]. At that time, it was said that the Chinese had seven hundred million people though all of them didn't come to Tibet. But they had many soldiers and they were well-equipped. Nevertheless, I used to feel glad and thought that it was good that Chushigandru was continuously striking telling blows to the Chinese. Although, I couldn't make good relations in the north, I made a good relationship with Chushigandru at my home [estate] in Lhoka. At that time, I let one of the Magji or Commanders in Chief [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི] of Chushigandru stay in my home. He was called Sonam Tsering [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་ཚེ་རིང]. Later, he died in Nepal. There was another person called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Chunden [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་ཆོས་ལྡན] who later died in Dharamsala. Both of them stayed at my home. At that time, they were not staying in the unreliable households. When I was at my estate, they came to my gate all of a sudden after it was completely dark. At that time, the people in Lhoka were afraid of Chushigandru because some of the thoughtless people in the Chushigandru slightly caused some harm to the miser. When they came to my house, my family members were scared a little bit saying that the Khambas are coming. At that time, I was at home and told them, "It doesn't matter. You don't need to be scared. Let them in and tell them to come to me. We can talk with them." When they came to me, they were holding guns in their hands." This was because they couldn't trust people right away. Then I told them to stay there overnight and relax and I served them tea and food and we talked in detail about where they came from and where they were going. Then one of them said, "We are from the Chushigandru and I came here as a Commander in Chief." My [Thönsur's] homeland in Lhoka was called Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར].   

**Q:**  Was that where the airport is [now] located?   

**A:**  Yes, it was at the upper part of the place where there was the airport. At that time, they said that they needed to collect barley for the salary of the soldiers and had to grind it into tsamba.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  It was in the 11th and 12th month of 1958. They said, "Our soldiers are increasing and since this area is an important place and the main road of the Chinese is here, we are planning to stay here. Tomorrow and the day after tomorrow, we are going to Gongkar Dzong and talk with them." I told them, "You can just stay at my home. You don't need to have any doubt that something might happen to you. I am not staying here. I have to leave for Lhasa and then I have to go to the north. Only the Estate Managers will be here and I will tell them that you can get your food and the hay for the horses from here. I am doing this because we are striving for a common cause. I am a government official. The Chinese have bullied us and have come to Tibet. Our government didn't sign the Agreement in a friendly manner. We Tibetans have only 6 million people and the Chinese have 7 hundred million and they invaded us. We, the government officials, are also hoping for the independence and you are the Volunteer Guardian Army of the Religion and are striving for independence so it is absolutely necessary for us to support you." Then they relaxed.   

**Q:**  How many people were there at that time?   

**A:**  Altogether, there were about 5 of them and all of them carried guns.   

**Q:**  Were they Khambas?   

**A:**  Two of them were from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and one of them looked like he was from Golok [Tib. མགོ་ལོག]. And there was a monk from Ütsang. I told them, "I am the Changji so I am leaving [for there] tomorrow." Among them there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> who came from Nagchu. He said, "This worked out so well. My home is in Nagchu. So because you are the governor there, please help them. I am here fighting for the common cause. I have a shop and I have so and so family members." I told him, "I will definitely help them." At that time, the Commander also asked me to do something. He said, "My wife is in Lhasa and I don't have a house there so I had to rent a house in Lhasa. Do you have a house in Lhasa? I said, "Yes, I have a big house in Lhasa so I will rent you a house in Lhasa." At that time, they were in accord with me on their private affairs and I was also glad. They stayed at my home for a couple of months. On the next day, when I left, they sent bodyguard soldiers to see me off carrying their guns up to the ferry site near the airport. They thought that something might happened if I would meet other Khambas. [all laughing]. Like this we got along very well. They also stayed on the estate decently and did the work of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, but they had bullied (abused) our people. When I was imprisoned [after 1959], the Chinese made me suffer extreme hardship. It was like the Tibetan saying, "The shit involuntarily comes out." [Tib. སྐྱག་པ་ཤོར་ཤོར]. They said, "You had kept the Magji of Chushigandru in your home."   

**Q:**  What happened after you went back to Lhasa?   

**A:**  At that time, my father passed away, so according to Tibetan customs, we had to make a lot of religious offerings like giving alms to the monks during the Mönlam Prayer Festival.   

**Q:**  You stayed in Lhoka for a short time and then you came back to Lhasa and prepared to go to the north. Was that in 1958?   

**A:**  Yes, that was at the end of 1958. At first I came from the north to Lhoka via Lhasa when my father died all of a sudden. After that, I stayed for awhile in Lhasa and then I planned to go to the north. But at that time, the revolt took place in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s were in Lhoka the meeting to "Mollifying the Central Committee and quell the Khamba's disturbances" was held in Lhasa. Did you attend that meeting?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. That was a meeting that the officials in Lhasa attended.   

**Q:**  Then maybe we will ask you about the revolt that took place after that.   

**A:**  Yesterday, I told you that I went to Lhoka, but I didn't tell you the name of the estate. The name of the estate was Gongkar Lhundrup [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ]. This is the estate that belonged to the Thönsur family.   

**Q:**  When the revolt took place, where were you staying and how did it happen?   

**A:**  Regarding the revolt, the government has printed many documents/materials about it and Taklha Depön [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ་མདའ་དཔོན] has the most reliable information.   

**Q:**  Yes, but each person had a different experience and thinking. So it is useful to collect them. We want to ask you what you did during the revolt.   

**A:**  If I tell you something, that would be the thing that you had already heard. At that time, I didn't have any duty/job in Lhasa because I was the Changji. When the revolt took place I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, how did you know that the revolt would take place and the Dalai Lama fled?   

**A:**  At that time, I was just about to go to the north because it was very important, but I didn't get a vehicle. There was a servant of Drubkhang Labrang [Tib. སྒྲུབ་ཁང་བླ་བྲང] in Nagchu. He also planned to go with me. After we were imprisoned we were made to destroy what they had made in the Military Headquarter.   

**A:**  In 1959, when we were imprisoned, the Chinese imprisoned people from the Acting Prime Minister [Tib. སིཙབ] down to the house managers [Tib. ཁང་གཉེར] of the Potala Palace. At that time, the Chinese told us, "You people have opposed us and you have committed a very serious crime." What we did was [because] we couldn't bear the responsibility for the life security of the Dalai Lama, and secondly Tibet has been a country from the ancient times and we were not at all the subjects (misers) of the Chinese. The Chinese bullied us and said that you have committed a serious crime and they imprisoned me for 20 years. Many people were also killed in the prison during that period. It was really like a slaughterhouse. In the prison, every year they killed people.   

**Q:**  How did you get to the prison?   

**A:**  At that time, some of the government officials were kept in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and some of them were in Lhasa. I was among the officials in Lhasa and we were arrested. At the beginning, they almost arrested all of the people regardless of whether they were government officials or not. They didn't arrest women and elderly. Most of the men were arrested and then they differentiated the people. They told us that all the government officials should stand up. At the beginning, the soldiers arrested us and we were gathered in the courtyard [Tib. འཁྱམ་ར] of the Jokhang. Right at that time, all the government officials were shut up in the prison. That was on the 22nd of March. We made war for several days in Lhasa. We shot at each other and the Chinese were firing canons everywhere like in Norbulinga and a severe destruction took place in Lhasa. Finally, we lost the war. The government officials who were in Lhasa were sent to the Chinese regiment and imprisoned. In the prison, they held a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a>s [Tib. 'thab rstod]. Whenever the struggle sessions were held, people would <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> up and beat them up and interrogate them. One couldn't confess something that one didn't do, so they would insist on saying that you are telling lies and then they would beat them us. I was also beaten and the wounds were bleeding. I had a very hard time. They told me that I did something when I was the Governor of North Tibet and when I went to Kongpo. Actually, I hadn't done that, but they made the criminal accusation by force. [Tib. ནག་ཉེས་བཙན་འགེལ]. For example, when I went to Kongpo, I had a wireless equipment set with me. The government had several of those wireless sets. They said, "You made relations with the foreign countries through the wireless set with the aim of driving out the Chinese. So you should confess to this." I confessed to the things that I did, but I refused to confess to the things that I didn't do. Then they told me, "You are stubborn and you are not confessing your crimes." So they beat me very severely and I was bleeding. At that time, I was a monk with a shaved head, so they just pulled my ears. So I got a wound on my ears, though it was completely pulled off. When people had hair, they pulled them by their hair. They held a struggle session for about 7-8 days. When they pulled my ears many times, the cartilage bone and the skin of my ears came apart and I felt my ears moving when I walked and I couldn't recover for 2-3 months.   

**Q:**  Did they call the masses of Lhasa to hold struggle sessions?   

**A:**  No, it was the prisoners in that prison. The Chinese cadres made them hold the struggle sessions and the male and female cadres were also there. They had made teams among the prisoners and sometimes they would call big meetings. When the big meeting was not held, the teams consisting of 20-30 people held the struggle sessions and they beat up people recklessly. In the prison we had to work all the time and the work was also very hard, like digging earth and carrying stones, and we had to run while carrying stones on our backs. Actually, that was the work that was done by animals.   

**Q:**  Which prison was that?   

**A:**  That was the prison in the Military Headquarters [Ch. jun qu]. At that time, most of the government officials were shut up in that prison. Sometimes, they starved us. At the beginning, we had enough food to be full. But in 1962-63, the Chinese told us, "There was a crop failure in China so everybody should increase production and economize expenses [Tib. ཐོན་སྤེལ་གྲོན་ཆུང]. So you prisoners are not allowed to eat food as usual. There will be a limit and they measured the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> in a small mug like this. When we made it into tsamba dough [Tib. སྤགས] it was a just a small lump. Whether it would be enough or not, all of the prisoners were given the same amount. Even when we had enough food to be full, when we worked for awhile we felt hungry. When we had a little amount of tsamba, we had to remain hungry during the whole day long. We had to remain like this for 1-2 years. But it was strange that we didn't die. Actually, it seemed that people would die. I stayed in the prison in the Military Headquarters for 6 years. After that we were moved to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] Prison and I stayed there for 14 years. After that, they also did the same and didn't give us enough food to eat. Why did they do that to us? If Tibet was part of China and we opposed them, then it was a serious crime. But, Tibet was not a part of China] At that time, the Chinese also killed people in the prison. And the prisoners also opposed the Chinese even after they were imprisoned. They couldn't oppose them by carrying guns and swords, but they were opposing them mentally and verbally. For example, there was a monk official aide of the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> Tsendrön whose name was Gyentsen Tempel [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བསྟན་འཕེལ]. He opposed the Chinese all the time until he was released. He said in front of the Chinese, "You just kill me right away. I am not afraid. Why did you imprison me? They held struggle sessions against him many times and he had a very hard time. They beat him up very severely so that he was just about to die. But until he was released, he said, "The Chinese are Chinese and the Tibetans are Tibetans. Why are you making me suffer like this. Is there any international law like this? You invaded us and now you are making us suffer." He was really brave. He is still alive and last year he came here.   

**Q:**  Usually, he stayed in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he is not to be blamed. His maternal aunt was the heroine Künsang [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང] who was related to Tsarong. She was one of the leaders of the Women's Association in 1959. She was killed in Trapchi. And his maternal uncle was the Chandzö (manager) of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> Jigyab Khembo who was the personal attendant of the Dalai Lama. He was also killed in Trapchi. Therefore, he made up his mind to sacrifice his life and verbally fought with the Chinese.   

