# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0213.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Dr. Richard K. Sprigg   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kalimpong, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Dr. Richard K. Sprigg   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 60  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dr. R.K. Sprigg was a well known linguist and Tibetologist who taught at SOAS. In this interview, he talks about his visit to Kalimpong and Tibet in 1950.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0213_01/H_0213_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  [ start didn't record] So they interviewed me.   

**Q:**  Oh, they interviewed you?   

**A:**  And they decided that I should go to Gyantse. Yes, yes, they allowed me to go as if I were Indian. I wasn't always Indian. I became an honorary Indian I think for that purpose.   

**Q:**  I see. So you lived in Tibet only three weeks? That was in 1950.   

**A:**  That's it. Yes.   

**Q:**  What is your impression of what was really happening at that time in Tibet?   

**A:**  Well, it's difficult to say because at that time the invasion hadn't taken place and no one knew that it would take place. Now of course, with the occupation of Tibet, it's difficult to remember quite what it was like, what my attitude was. But I thought the country was very unprepared for an invasion.   

**Q:**  Definitely. Even I know that because when the Chinese actually walked in, even then no one believed they were coming.   

**A:**  I saw there was a great deal of anxiety, but I didn't think anyone was convinced that the invasion would take place. There was a great spirit of optimism which was not justified.   

**Q:**  That's true, that's true. So you were the only foreigner there in Gyantse?   

**A:**  Yes. Tucci had been there earlier, and also of course the American Thomas, he had been there-Lowell Thomas. He had been there the year before.   

**Q:**  The year was 1949 right?   

**A:**  '49 through '50…   

**Q:**  Yes, '49 and '50 that's right.   

**A:**  I arrived in Calcutta in '49 and Lowell Thomas had arrived from Lhasa just at that time, too. Yes, he was brought down injured of course. He was injured by a mule. So he came down at that time and Rinzin Wangpo, [Tib. རིག་འཛིན་དབང་པོ] and I traveled together from London [see Rinzin Wangpo's interviews at H.0210].   

**Q:**  Oh I see. You came together with Rinzin Wangpo from London and then went after all.   

**A:**  Then we separated in Calcutta, I stayed on a little longer, then he came up to Kalimpong and I met him again.   

**Q:**  I see. I was talking to Rinzin Wangpo the other day and he relayed his experience of meeting you in the ship and you said, "Welcome teacher" [Tib. rgan lags phyag phebs gnang byubg] and he was very happy.   

**A:**  We shared a cabin because this was quite soon after the war and it was very difficult to get accommodations on the ship and so the university made inquiries and they found that unless he shared a cabin with me, he would have had to wait in London for nearly another year so we traveled together like that.   

**Q:**  I see, yes, very nice.   

**A:**  I used to encourage him to wear his Tibetan dress on the ship.   

**Q:**  On the ship?   

**A:**  Because he was very conspicuous really. He was the only Tibetan of course. Most of the passengers were Australian.   

**Q:**  And so, during when you were in Tibet, it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s rule.   

**A:**  I think it must have been.   

**Q:**  And did any of the people talk of the Dalai Lama taking over from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> or this sort of thing?   

**A:**  I can't remember any discussion of that sort. Gyantse is a very small place compared to Lhasa; very provincial. There only were a few families there that I used to meet.   

**Q:**  Didn't you talk about the Panchen Lama at that time?   

**A:**  No. I think not, because one of those families was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] The name of an important Shigatse aristocratic family.">Delerabten</a>'s [Tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] family from Shigatse and I think it would have been unwise of them being from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང] province to have mentioned <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> or anything to do with Shigatse.   

**Q:**  That's true. It was disputed. There was a sort of heated argument over the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama whether it was correct or not.   

**A:**  Yes. Whether it was the correct incarnation or not. I think they preferred to be noncommittal at that time since it was in doubt.   

**Q:**  Yes and no. Actually a certain part of the people didn't accept that the incarnation that they found in Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོས] was the true one. And on the Tashilunpo side, I think they didn't accept what the Tibetan government wanted. This is only my personal opinion.   

**A:**  Of course, it's a long time ago. 30 years. My nearest neighbor was Jogtre, [Tib. ལྕོག་བཀྲས] Kungö. His wife was from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] The name of an important Shigatse aristocratic family.">Delerabten</a> family so I used to meet him almost everyday and then quite near by was one of the Phala [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ] family.   

**Q:**  Yes. Phala Kundring Wangchugla, [Tib. སྐུ་འབྲིང་དབང་ཕྱུག་ལགས] [the middle son].   

**A:**  He's in Switzerland is he now? I liked him.   

**Q:**  He was a nice man.   

**A:**  He was very enlightened too I thought.   

**Q:**  You think so?   

**A:**  Oh, yes. Because instead of spending his time eating and drinking as he could've done in the countryside, he was in charge of a school there. He had his own school.   

**Q:**  Yes, he started his own school.   

**A:**  Yes, for his own tenants [Tib. མི་སེར]. He used to teach in the school himself.   

**Q:**  Interesting. He was very good at collecting, what do you call it? Sort of monopolizing the economic gain in any direction. They say he was very good at building up wealth and would supervise the people weaving carpets.   

**A:**  Yes. I didn't know about that side. I only helped him to spend it because when I was there he gave good parties you see. Very generous, very lavish.   

**Q:**  Yes, he gave very lavish parties too, but at the same time he was good at building up wealth.   

**A:**  I remember one very well because I went there with the Indian army medical officer and they gave him too much to drink you see. He got very drunk. We had great difficulty carrying him back. I had my servant Penjor Phüntso [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་ཕུན་ཚོགས] -- he was my servant sent by the Tsarong [Tib. ཚ་རོང] family and he and I had to carry this man back between us and of course being drunk he was very troublesome and every time we picked him up he kept pinching my bottom until I put him down. He was from Madras this doctor. His name was Noga Rajan I think. As a matter of fact, I think they were very naughty. I think they wanted to make him drunk. I think Phala wanted to make him drunk because he put up a badminton set, you see, and he persuaded the doctor to try to play. The doctor was very good at badminton, but only when sober, not when drunk, so he couldn't hit it . And so Phala brought one of his tenants who had never played before and there they were both trying to hit the shuttlecock and neither of them could hit it; one because he wasn't clever enough, the other because he was too drunk. Very light hearted life we used to have there. And then Phala said this was an object lesson because here was a very skillful man who was now unskillful because of drink so we should all learn a lesson he said, not to drink too much. The doctor didn't understand Tibetan so he didn't understand this.   

**Q:**  And how long did you stay in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Part of the time I was…   

**Q:**  It was about that time Abo Raga, [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་དགའ] and Gendün Chömphel, [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] was around here. maybe it was before the big influx of Tibetans came, the invasion had not yet begun.   

**Q:**  But in '58 you were here?   

**A:**  No, between '49 and '50, yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> was already here. He was waiting to go to Hong Kong. And Taring, [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a>, he was at that time also on his way to Hong Kong, but they didn't get there.   

**Q:**  I would like to know what really happened. If you could tell something about what they were trying to do, why they were unable to go and what other things were happening. Your own observations.   

**A:**  Well, of course, in those days, the Chinese were only a cloud on the horizon. The invasion had not begun and most Tibetans were in a holiday mood. Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> was here on holiday. He had a house, I think in 9th mile, quite near <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a>'s [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང] house. Sandutsang was also here. Then, at the time of New Year, there were a number of members of the noble families here. Lady Ngabö Lhajam <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ཞབས] A respectful term of address usually for monks, but also to show respect to a layman.">Kusho</a>, [Tib. ང་ཕོད་ལྷ་ལྕམ་སྐུ་ཞབས] was here too and Lady <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was also here. There were good parties you see. Rani Dorje, I remember, had a very interesting party for Tibetan New Year at that time with very fine Tibetan opera singing. There was a man called Chamba Sangdag, [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གསང་བདག] who attended that party and I made recordings there.   

**Q:**  Oh how beautiful. Do you still have them?   

**A:**  Yes, I still have excerpts I can play for you. They were used by the BBC once; when they wanted an example of Tibetan music I lent them to them. Um, but he <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> very well. Muti Gyalpo, [Tib. མུ་ཏིག་རྒྱལ་པོ], he sang, and also bits of the Gesar Songs, Lingdrum, [Tib. གླིང་སྒྲུང] he could sing.   

**Q:**  Chamba Sangdag I believe was a very interesting person whom I've been informed came here to work for Reting.   

**A:**  Yes, I think he was probably a refugee.   

**Q:**  Not at that time. He might have come to work…if not a political refugee, certainly economic.   

**A:**  This was quite soon of course after the trouble with Reting Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  Where were you during the trouble with Reting Rimpoche?   

**A:**  I was in London then.   

**Q:**  Were you taking an interest then in Tibet?   

**A:**  I was beginning to take an interest, yes.   

**Q:**  What did you know about Tibet?   

**A:**  Not very much.   

**Q:**  I see. Did you believe that Reting Rimpoche had been assassinated or…   

**A:**  I don't know enough about that to say. I learnt a little about it because at the time that I was here one of the Dorje family, Rimpoche Ugyenla, [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས] came down from Lhasa, and he used to tell me about this. I was giving him boxing lessons in those days. Raja Dorje asked me to give him boxing lessons, and when we were not boxing he told me that really it was a very terrifying time in Lhasa because he was there and he heard the artillery fire because there was fighting at the time.   

**Q:**  I was a kid at that time. I think I was about twelve. My father went on a visit to India at that time. But I never did meet Reting Rimpoche.   

**A:**  You didn't meet him ever.   

**Q:**  I did meet him.   

**A:**  You did meet him.   

**Q:**  Yes. Then one day his body moved down from the Potala and a lot of people say he died, a lot of people said it was due to some protector, some monk…we had heard, I remember; but it could happen, but not likely. So, we have been trying to study this, what really had happened and it's very difficult and there is no historical evidence, nothing. I was talking the other day, two days ago, to Thando [Tib. དར་མདོ] Rimpoche, you know Thando Rimpoche?   

**A:**  No, I have not met him.   

**Q:**  He was here a long time in India, and he went to school here. What do you call Thando Rimpoche's school? Hadolous school in Bodh Gaya. It was like a junior high school. So I was talking to him, and he said he remembers reading in the newspaper that Reting Rimpoche was assassinated. I've tried to find a copy but I couldn't get it.   

**A:**  I wonder if there are copies kept here by his son.   

**Q:**  No. He had been kind enough you know for me to go through all the documents and there are no copies. Everything is hot to the touch. What were you really, what was your impression?   

**A:**  I was too much of an outsider really to know. I used to go riding with young Ugyenla, you see. This was my reward for the boxing lessons. Raja Dorje had a number of ponies and the young Rimpoche and I used to go riding up to Durping and so on. And then he told me what an exciting time it was, but he was very young at that time, and so I don't think he was in a position to know what was happening. I think he was in one of the Lings; I forget which one it was. Not Reting, no, young Dorje Ugyen la. Wasn't he from one of the Lings? Which was his monastery at that time?   

**Q:**  He is the one called Trashö, [Tib. དྲག་ཤོས] Rimpoche, right?   

**A:**  Probably.   

**Q:**  He might've been from Büde [Tib. སྦུད་བདེ] Monastery in Nyethang, [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང].   

**A:**  He is not from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> [Tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང], right?   

**Q:**  He studied in Mindröling. He is not from those Lings [Tib. གླིང]. Oh I see. I'm afraid I'm very ignorant of the religious life of the…   

**Q:**  No, not at all. So, do you know anything about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> [Tib. ལུང་ཤར] who had been in London?   

**A:**  Ah. No, I only know about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> who lives here in Kalimpong. He teaches on the staff of Dr. Graham's Homes. He's a member of that family.   

**Q:**  He's a junior son of the family Lungshar.   

**A:**  It's the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family isn't it, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**Q:**  No, I don't think so.   

**A:**  Isn't it? Ah. I think there are probably mistakes in this book. They say that it is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> probably two or three times.   

**Q:**  Lhalu, [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] maybe, not Lungshar.   

**A:**  I used to go and meet him to practice Tibetan at lunch time. I think it's, if you're going to learn Tibetan, you should learn from a member of one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> families, and then you'll get the best quality Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Yes, that's definite.   

**A:**  But I'm told that some of these Ladakh Khache (Muslims) speak Tibetan very well.   

**Q:**  As a matter of fact the Muslims in Lhasa may speak better Tibetan than anyone in Tibet.   

**A:**  It shouldn't be so. This is what the father was telling me, that they're a very good model to follow.   

**Q:**  And what do you think about the functions of Pomda Ragala, [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་རབ་དགའ་ལགས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la, [Tib. ཀུན་ཕེལ་ལགས] and Gendün Chömphel La and all they have in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  I'm not sure that I know them. I do know Rabga, but he's a schoolmaster; he's one of the staff of St Augustine. Is he the same Rabga? I think he's connected with. That's right, Rabga. His family's from Pomdatsang. The Pomdatsang family?   

**Q:**  No, I'm talking about his father. I think in the mid forties, maybe '49. They had been trying to set up a democratic system in Tibet. I don't know; they had been doing something. So, obviously it didn't really meet with the desire of Kalimpong and they had to leave. Did you ever hear of Gendün Chömpel before?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  What about this fellow, Janglojen Gung, [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་གུང]?   

**A:**  No. Um, I did meet Kündeling, [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Rimpoche when he was here.   

**Q:**  You mean Tatshag Rimpoche, [Tib. རྟ་ཚགས]?   

**A:**  Yes. This was in '49. He was staying here with Sandutshang, and then later on I met him in Gyantse because he went down to Calcutta and on his way back he came to see me when I was in Gyantse and this was very good for me you see because my prestige increased enormously when he came to see me and everyone was very respectful after that. When I met him, he bumped foreheads with me, you see. With the others he simply touched them with the tassel from the robe when they bent their heads down. With me, he bumped foreheads and this was reported in Gyantse so people after that were very kind and considerate to me.   

**Q:**  I see, I see. The lamas play a very important role in Tibetan culture. Don't they?   

**A:**  As a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trülku</a> you must know that yourself.   

**Q:**  Yes, but one doesn't realize how much it affects things socially.   

**A:**  The Pechö Khembo, [Tib. དཔལ་ཆོས་མཁན་པོ] whom I met in Gyantse was afterwards killed by the Chinese I think.   

**Q:**  Who was it? What was his name?   

**A:**  I don't think I ever knew his name.   

**Q:**  I see, all you knew was Pechö Khembo. Was it Tubden Nyinje, [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད]?   

**A:**  He was a young man, about 21 perhaps, in age.   

**Q:**  A monk?   

**A:**  Yes. A young monk and…  

**Q:**  Round eyes?   

**A:**  I think so, and he used to wear dark glasses.   

**Q:**  One of the Pechö Khembo was here, in India. His name was Thubden Nyinje. He worked for the Dalai Lama's Bureau in Delhi for many years and now he retired   

**A:**  He was in charge of the monastery in Gyantse and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> at that time. His son was a young man, I think his name was Changöpa, [Tib. བྱ་དངོས་པ].   

**Q:**  Changöpa? He speaks English?   

**A:**  No, he didn't, but I think his uncle did.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, young Changöpa.   

**A:**  Yes. His uncle's name was Ringang [Tib. རིན་སྒང] wasn't it? He went to school in England.   

**Q:**  Changöpa himself was one of those who went to England too.   

**A:**  I have a photograph of the one who went to England. In a book by Chapman.   

**Q:**  Since you're interested in Tibetan and Tibetan things, have you ever come across a book written by Sir Basil Gould after his visit to Tibet in Tibetan? Have you read it?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Hopkinson's?   

**A:**  No. I don't think he wrote one did he? I met him but…   

**Q:**  He didn't write any?   

**A:**  No, I don't think so.   

**Q:**  But Gould did; he wrote in Tibetan.   

**A:**  I'm pretty sure he did.   

**Q:**  How thick the book is?   

**A:**  I'm not sure. I've not seen it ever. I've only read I think that one of his books was translated into Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Which book was it?   

**A:**  I'm not sure. Was it the one on the finding of the fourteenth.   

**Q:**  That's it, that's it. Because I saw one page yesterday in the Tharchin Babu's [Tib. མཐར་ཕིན; ཧིན་བ་བུ] collection. Only page seventeen. So, I wasn't sure who wrote it.   

**A:**  It could be Bell. Gould or Bell. I wonder which it would be, Gould or Bell.   

**Q:**  Bell's is there. Bell's is translated? No, I think Bell's is too early. It must be Gould. Do you have any idea, in English, what is the title of the book?   

**A:**  No, I must try and find out. I may be able to because I've got a copy of Gould's autobiography upstairs and probably he mentions it. He should have.   

**Q:**  Did you ever know that some people from Chicago went to Tibet and wrote their impression of Tibet in Tibetan.   

**A:**  No, I didn't know about that at all. I know there is a man called McGovern who wrote a book called To Lhasa in Disguise because he was on the staff of the school of Oriental and African Studies at that time. It must've been about 1920 I suppose. He got special permission to stay on in Darjeeling and then he disguised himself and went up to Lhasa as a servant and he wrote a book about it.   

**Q:**  A servant of what?   

**A:**  A servant to some trader I think, you know, an Indian or Nepalese trader. And, he got dysentery badly on the way and was very badly treated by his master so that he had to, he went to I think a Sikkimese who was in Lhasa who revealed his identity and then he was sent back again. But I believe he in the end took up a post as a lecturer at a Chicago university.   

**Q:**  Oh I see. Must be that one.   

**A:**  McGovern.   

**Q:**  Because Rinzin Wangpola was mentioning about someone from Chicago who went to Lhasa and his impressions he wrote in Tibetan. All the others wrote in English and were translated into Tibetan and were published by Potima so I never found the book.   

**A:**  This was published in America I think.   

**Q:**  The Tibetan version was published by Potima, here.   

**A:**  I Shouldn't think this would be very interesting to publish because after all if you were disguised as a servant you wouldn't be able to see very much. You wouldn't be able to meet people of importance or influence.   

**Q:**  That's true, but he already knew what events had already happened and what people are talking about and sometimes the servants of the good families are more talkative and more informative than the masters themselves.   

**A:**  But He didn't know Tibetan very well, so he wouldn't have been able to speak to them. He knew enough I think to escape detection, you see, but otherwise. I haven't got a copy of his book. I'll show you my library if you like. I brought quite a lot of books with me.   

