# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0011.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 21 May 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 69  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyegyepa [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ] was a lay aristocratic government official who served with Lhalu in Chamdo. After this he was sent as a staff officer in the Dalai Lama's new Bureau Office in Beijing. He returned to Lhasa in 1955 and worked in the Kashag as a gadrung. In this interview, he discusses, in detail, his regular work as a gadrung for the Kashag and the rules in the Kashag. He also describes the main work of the Kashag in the 1950s and the Khamba's disturbance. He describes Surkhang's changing attitudes and how he thought that the Kashag didn't really want to stop the Khambas, and Phala's involvement with the U.S. and the Kashag. He discusses the Large Abbreviate Assembly meeting of delegates from all ranks and what they discussed, the relationships between Phala, Surkhang and Shasur, as well as some names of the tsidrung who were in Barshi Tsendrön's group.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0011_04/H_0011_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  One of the tasks done by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> was to write down everything, like writing down the plans, and we had to also write the approval notes [Tib. འགོ་མཆན] on the petitions. Usually, we made all the drafts and then asked the kalön whatever they wanted to add or erase, and then they made the clean copy.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering (TT): When you made a draft of a plan, did you write it on a samdra?   

**A:**  No, we would write it down on paper and give it to them.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> were there?   

**A:**  There were two gadrung. The senior one would keep the seal of the Kashag and the key of the seal box would be kept by the senior kalön.   

**Q:**  Was there any difference between the power of the senior kalön and the other kalön?   

**A:**  There wasn't any difference in power, but normally, the senior would start the discussions.   

**Q:**  TT: This was like the prayer leader starting the prayer, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  Who appointed the senior kalön?   

**A:**  It was according to seniority. It was not appointed from above, and there were also assistant [Tib. ལས་རོགས] kalön and the katsab.   

**Q:**  When you first became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> who were the kalön?   

**A:**  Ngabö, Surkhang, Liushar (Katsab), and Ramba. Then Shasur was added as assistant kalön. The assistant kalön was not obliged to send riders [Tib. རྟ་པ] during the Mönlam like the full kalön had to. During my time, the kalön lama was Liushar. He succeeded Ramba.   

**Q:**  Was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> there?   

**A:**  When I first came, yes, he was there. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> was also a katsab. In 1956, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> went to India and died soon after he returned.   

**Q:**  What about Yuthok?   

**A:**  Yuthok became Katsab at the same time that Liushar did. During my time, the senior kalön tripa was Surkhang until the end.   

**Q:**  From 1956-1959, what did the Kashag mainly do?   

**A:**  Normally, the Kashag answered the questions put forward by the offices, and they appointed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and sent out the edicts. In addition to that, from the 1950's a new responsibility was put into practice in the 17-Point Agreement. The Kashag and the Tibet Work Committee discussed things daily.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag have its own translator?   

**A:**  Yes. There was Norbu Tsering [Tib. ནོར་བུ་ཚེ་རིང] from the early times. At first, he was a translator, but later, the Kashag used Phüntso Tashi la, and then Li Zuoming did the translating as he spoke good Tibetan.   

**Q:**  What were the most important problems the Kashag had during this period (1956-59)?   

**A:**  In 1956, it was on the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region and reforms. Then the People's Association and the three great monasteries sent petitions saying we didn't want reforms. Then the Panchen Lama went to India and there was a six year postponement of reforms. This was announced to all at a big meeting. Because of the postponement, the offices were reduced in size. There was much talk about the bad reforms in Kham at this time. And because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s opposed reforms, the Khamba issue arose in many Tibetan areas.   

**Q:**  During that period, do you remember the important correspondences between the Kashag and the Chinese?   

**A:**  [bad recording] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> arose mainly in 1957. Many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s came to Tibet, and there were many complaints from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> that the Khambas were raiding and stealing from Tibetans. This got bigger and bigger. Then the Chinese said that the Kashag must stop the activities of these Khambas. But the Kashag didn't have the strength to stop it. So the Kashag's work from then on was mainly to try to stop the Khambas and to apologize to the Chinese for their actions. The Khamba's regiment was at Drigu. And Andru Gombo Tashi and Jamatsang were their leaders. The Chinese said that they suspected that there was a connection between the Khambas and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Depön Tashi Berala.   

**Q:**  Was this true?   

**A:**  I don't know, but if the Central government said it, it is probably true. I did hear that the Central government told the Kashag that it was their responsibility to stop this connection. The Kashag sent people to stop the Khambas with an order with the Dalai Lama's seal. The first was [sent with] Minkyiling and the abbot of Drepung, Ngagpa Khembo. Then a second was [sent with] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] An important aristocratic family that commonly provided monk officials.">Tregang</a> Khenjung Samjola.   

**Q:**  What did they report when they returned?   

**A:**  They said that the Khambas didn't listen, but what they told the Kashag I don't know. But not only did they not listen to them, but afterwards they raided the Shang Ganden Chöngor Monastery to get the guns the government had stored there.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were different opinions among the kalön. For example, Ngabö was in favor of trying to stop the Khambas.   

**A:**  This became clear later. At one meeting, Tan Guansan scolded Surkhang.   

**Q:**  TT: I heard that Tan Guansan used the word "kai" for scolding Surkhang at one meeting.   

**A:**  I'm not sure, but whatever he said, he was very strongly criticizing him. Zhang Guohua was not in Tibet at this time. It was in 1958.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the scolding at the meeting?   

**A:**  It was that the Kashag was not really trying to stop the Khambas.   

**Q:**  Did the Zhongyang think that Surkhang was blocking the government's efforts to stop the Khambas?   

**A:**  He was the senior, the [kalön] tripa, so he scolded him. I think that Ngabö was in favor of stopping the Khambas. But Surkhang and the others were kind of dilly dallying [Tib. snya ge syo ge].   

**Q:**  TT: You mean they didn't want to stop them right away, right?   

**A:**  It was probably like that. The Chinese probably knew about these differences in the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Ngabö and Surkhang are clear. What did the other kalön think?   

**A:**  The other kalön were Liushar and Shasur. These two were the same as Surkhang.   

**Q:**  The Chinese labelled Surkhang as anti-Chinese, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Gyalo Thondup were [later] saying that he was pro-Chinese, how can this be?   

**A:**  People have an inner appearance and an outer appearance. So we don't know what people really think, like whether they were showing an appearance to deceive others. But Surkhang probably did not want to stay in Lhasa at this time. He must have made his decision, and that was clear to everyone. His appearance showed this. He had sent all of his things to India. Since Surkhang had responsibilities, he showed different faces to different groups.   

**Q:**  What was Ngabö's plan for how to deal with the Khambas?   

**A:**  He was probably saying that a lot of garbage had come from the east and we must clean them.   

**Q:**  People in India say the government couldn't send the army since perhaps they would join the rebels and make things worse, and Tashi Bera was anti-Chinese. So it seems to me they could have just changed the generals and captains and officers if they really wanted to do something about the Khambas, right? If they had changed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a>, they would have listened to the order and fought with the Khambas. So what do you think?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. You are correct. The reason why China was angry was that the Kashag wouldn't do anything to put down the Khambas. The Kashag said to the Chinese, "On the one hand, we have no power to do this, and secondly, the soldiers will stay there." So using this as an excuse they didn't do anything about the Khambas. Later, it was clear that Ngabö was very enthusiastic for reforms, but the other kalön were not.   

**Q:**  You mean it was clear after the revolt?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Phala had relations with the US through Gyalo Thondup and they dropped arms. The Americans thought that Gyalo Thondup was the representative of the Dalai Lama ,and they only had relations with Phala and not with the other kalön. Did Phala have relations with the kalön in this regard? Is it possible that Phala was doing that separately, and he kept it secret from the kalön and didn't tell them about this? What do you think about this now?   

**A:**  [very bad recording] I think it is possible that he could have kept the US ties a secret because it was very dangerous. Even if he had told this, it would have been 1-2 people. Normally, Phala was a very tactful and malicious person [Tib. གནག་པོ] and also deceitful [Tib. གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ཚ་པོ], so it is possible.   

**Q:**  Did Phala have any kind of close relations with the other kalön.   

**A:**  Yes, they were close. And Surkhang and Shasur were related to Phala. Shasur was a close relative.   

**Q:**  Was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> a brother of Phala from the same parents?   

**A:**  I'm not sure of this, but he was a close relative.   

**Q:**  I think that there was a change in Surkhang in 1957 when he turned to support the Khambas. I think then he learned of the US help and decided this was better than continuing to try to work with the Chinese. That's why he brought his kids back to Tibet in 1955 (I think) and then secretly sent Yangjenla [Tib. དབྱངས་ཅན་ལགས] and Chundenla [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས] to India in 1958, in a Sikkimish vehicle. Earlier he was in favor of adhering to the 17-Point Agreement, but then he changed, and I think he must have learned of the US's greater support through Phala and this led to the change. What do you think about this?   

**A:**  [bad recording] This started in 1956 when the Dalai Lama went to India and the three kalön were there, and they had the trouble over there on the matter of the Dalai Lama's return. When they couldn't make the decision, Zhou Enlai came. [unclear recording] After that, Surkhang might have thought that the situation would be okay because of the postponement of the reform for 6 years, and he called his children back. Later, when he didn't see any hope, he might have changed.   

**Q:**  Was there a difference in opinion of the Dalai Lama's return between the three kalön?   

**A:**  I don't know. [unclear recording]   

**Q:**  I heard there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> in 1958. This meeting was not like the previous ones, and there were two delegates selected from each rank and there were 8 teams. The meeting was presided by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> and they mainly discussed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, and there was a minute in which it was written that Chushigandru was Tibetan and it was a matter of internal Tibetans. When the minute was submitted to the Kashag, Ngabö was angry and he ripped the minute into pieces and walked out. At that time, the tsendrön was Barshi Jedrungla. Do you have anything to say about this meeting?   

**A:**  I think this was a hragdü gyeba meeting in the Legjö Legung, of which Ngabö was the head. I think what you said happened there. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> and delegates, and the representative of the three great monasteries were all there. But I don't think Ngabö ripped the minute. I can't recall what was concluded.   

**Q:**  Since the other kalön would not support him, this was the last chance to get the government to do something. It failed and he was angry since now it was clear that there would be a revolt [and it would get] worse and worse--this is my view. After 1959, when everything became clear, was there any evidence presented in the interrogations that the Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had relations, and they sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> to help the Khambas?   

**A:**  I don't know of any.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola, did they help the Khambas mobilize the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>?   

**A:**  [bad recording] They did go around Lhüntse Dzong. I heard this just about the time the revolt was to start.   

**Q:**  Do you think the Kashag sent them since the people at this time didn't like the Khambas.   

**A:**  Yes, of course. At this time, the Kashag was getting a lot of petitions from the dzongs complaining that the people were complaining about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> thefts, etc. So this bothered the Dalai Lama a lot. Whether these were false or not, I don't know.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama left, did the kalön tell you internally that he was going to India?   

**A:**  They told me to stay. Surkhang actually said it. He said, "A lot of reports will come and when they ask where we are, say we are discussing things with the Dalai Lama. We are going a little way past Lhoka since it isn't safe here anymore." I wasn't aware of the preparations being made for the flight. [very bad recording]   

**Q:**  Did you think he was really going to Lhoka?   

**A:**  The thinking was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> could be an artillery target, so if they went to Lhoka, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was there and it would be safer.   

**Q:**  Would Phala have dared not to tell the Dalai Lama about US help etc. in 1957-58?   

**A:**  [bad recording] He would have definitely told the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Who was the jigyab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] Abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khembo</a> then?   

**A:**  Gadrang.   

**Q:**  What was the quality of the relationship between Phala and Trijang Rimpoche?   

**A:**  It was probably good, but I don't know for sure.   

**Q:**  Barshi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a>, he had an anti-Chinese group, who is left from this group nowadays of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> who went to China?   

**A:**  Ngawang Thöndrub, Ngawang Senge, Champa Tendarla [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར], [the second two are dead]. There are none left.   

**Q:**  Did you know about the organization?   

**A:**  No, was there really one?   

**Q:**  Yes, Gyentsen Tempel [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བསྟན་འཕེལ] is alive but I doubt he was part of this.   

**A:**  There is Temajog [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོག] Thubden Kunga [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཀུན་དགའ]. He is alive.   

