# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0011.02 : Tape 2  
##  Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tashi Tsering and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 69  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyegyepa [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ] was a lay aristocratic government official who served with Lhalu in Chamdo. After this he was sent as a staff officer in the Dalai Lama's new Bureau Office in Beijing. He returned to Lhasa in 1955 and worked in the Kashag as a gadrung. In this interview, he talks about the People's Association's petition to the Kashag toward the end of 1955. He discusses the beginning of the Tibet Autonomous Region and how reforms were slated to start in Tibet, but were later postponed. He then describes the revolt and how the Dalai Lama's invitation to the Chinese Military Headquarters was one of its main causes. Additionally, he discusses how the Dalai Lama sent the tsondu out of Norbulinga and the secret code book for sending letters.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0011_02/H_0011_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  One of the big events after you became <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> was that in the end of 1955 the People's Association gave a petition to the Kashag and they were eventually detained/arrested. Can you tell us about what was written in the petition and what the Kashag said? And after that, in 1956, leaflets were thrown at the Mönlam, right?   

**A:**  This must be at the end of 1955. I heard that the People's Association gave a petition to the Tibet Work Committee in Yuthok and it was said that they also reported this to the Kashag, but from my own firsthand experience I didn't know about that. And I don't know what it said. About the time of Mönlam [1956], some monks came. I don't know if they came privately or as representatives of the three great monasteries, and they submitted a petition to the Kashag saying that it was not acceptable to start reforms. At this time, I was a new <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>, so I didn't know in detail what the Kashag talked about with the Tibet Work Committee. Because they received many petitions, I heard that the Tibet Work Committee reported to Beijing saying that if the masses didn't agree [to the] reforms, it would be okay not to do the reforms and it was confirmed that it would be okay to postpone the reforms for 6 years. At that time, the Dalai Lama was in India. Then one day the Work Committee summoned the abbots of the three great monasteries, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a>, and lay and monk officials of the Tibetan government, and told them at Yuthok that the reforms had been postponed for 6 years. I just heard that the masses submitted the petition, I don't know the contents of the petition. [This was in 1956 while Dalai Lama was visiting India.]   

**Q:**  Who decided on arresting these 3 people, was it the Kashag?   

**A:**  At this time, externally, the Kashag was supposed to have the power over all the government's activities. At this time, the Tibet Work Committee and the Kashag had discussions on these matters and the Work Committee said, "Since this is a work aimed at destroying the 17-Point Agreement and destroying the relations between the Chinese and the Tibetans, it's not okay to allow this kind of activity." Because of this, the Kashag arrested them [Note: this was a faux detention in the sense that they could go home at night, have visitors and servants].   

**Q:**  Trindor: So this was the order from the Work Committee, right?   

**A:**  If the Work Committee hadn't given the order to arrest them, the Kashag wouldn't have done that because there was no reason for doing that. Because the other side was talking about the contradiction, the Kashag had to do that. There were two appearances of people's representatives. The later one involved Alo Chöndze, Shigatse Lhabju, Bumtang Trunyi, Kamika Chöndze and Chandzö Thamjö Sonam. While they were being arrested, the three great monasteries guaranteed that they wouldn't do this in the future, so Alo Chöndze was released. Then after this, Alo Chöndze went to India [1956]. [[Not in the tape] Trindor has a friend who was in the Security Office who was told to follow Alo Chöndze the night before he was to leave for India and see who he met and talked to and what they said. He did this and followed Alo Chöndze to Chidiling [Tib. ཇུས་འདིངས་གླིང] but couldn't get close enough to hear what he and the others said, and didn't recognize who they were. This shows that the government knew he was leaving.]   

**Q:**  I heard that the leaflet that they distributed at Mönlam was mimeographed in India, not handwritten in Tibet. It was done by Jenkhentsisum. Did you hear that?   

**A:**  Yes. There were several instances where I heard that printed materials from India were brought back by people who went on pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  When these three were put under arrest, did the Kashag do this on their own or was the Dalai Lama consulted? What was the system?   

**A:**  When the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were functioning, the system was that the Work Committee would inform the Kashag who would consult with the sitsab, who would inform the Dalai Lama. After the 2 sitsab got demoted, the Work Committee would go directly to discuss things with the Dalai Lama as well as with the Kashag. On matters like the people [who] submitted the petitions, when the Work Committee told the Kashag that this is inappropriate and violated the Agreement, the Kashag had to do something and they reported it to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  What was the division of the administrative power between the Kashag government and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region? I think after the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up they made some laws or rules, and the Kashag also made some laws or rules. Is that correct?   

**A:**  The Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was started, but in actuality, they weren't able to do any administration of Tibet right away because the reforms were postponed. The Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region included the Senior and the Vice Chairman [Ch. zhu ren], the General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ], the Main Office [Tib. དོན་གཅོད་ཁང], the Civil Administration Bureau [Tib. དམངས་སྲིད Ch. ting] and many other offices. And in the Lhasa Municipality, it had many offices, and in each <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> they had Administration Offices [Tib. དོན་གཅོད་ཁང]. Later, since they couldn't do the actual work [of administrating] and became [functioning] only in name, these offices were closed. Therefore, all of the [administrating] continued to be done by the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Before that, was there a plan where the Tibetan government would no longer exist and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region would seize the power? Or was there a plan for the both of them to function side by side?   

**A:**  No, That couldn't work. When the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, I thought that the 17-Point Agreement was signed and the so-called Tibet Autonomous Region meant that it was accepted that Tibet has become a part of China. But autonomy meant that on our own territory, we Tibetans would rule like being the master of one's own household. So I thought, if it would be like this, this would not be so bad. For example, it was said that the main Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was the Dalai Lama, and then the Panchen Lama and Ngabö and all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and the government officials were in all of the offices that were set up. So we could see clearly that the old system was going to end. Because people saw this danger, the masses asked for a postponement of the reforms.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Panchen Lama said that he wanted to start test reforms in Shigatse. Were there any relations over this between the Kashag [and the Panchen]?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Labrang had a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> under it and over these the Labrang ruled. In the past, Tashilhunpo had a big territory, but basically it was under the Tibetan government. It sort of worked out that the two [lamas] ended up at different ages, one older and one younger, and the older became the tutor of the younger one and they alternated. So they gave great rewards to each other and thus <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> had many formal land tenure documents so that they could rule those places. Finally, the 10th Panchen Lama came back from China and set up the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> Office and they got the power [over their lands]. Labrang said that they would do trial reforms on their own areas, which meant the 13 dzongs and estates under the Shigatse area.   

**Q:**  Were they in control of all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> area?   

**A:**  No. Only over their own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. They had 13 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates and there they wanted to have trial [land] reforms. if they did reforms on their own lands, the Kashag could say nothing. So in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, in some areas controlled by Labrang, it is said that there were trial reforms. It is said they eliminated horse and pack animal corvée taxes. At the same time, the Kashag, in accordance with the terms of the 17-Point Agreement, also should have implemented reforms, so they started a Lekjö Legung (Reform Office). Its main task was to work out exemptions on taxes, and eliminate the system of horse and pack animal corvée taxes. And the Lekjö Legung reformed the system of holding dzong. It used to be that all the income went to the dzongpön, but after the Lekjö Office's new policy, the government managed the [income of the] dzong and gave salaries to the dzongpön. They made a rule that the dzongpön was not allowed to collect the dzong's income for himself. This was a big reform. And for the miser, there was talk of tax exemptions and of a reduction of horse and pack animal corvée taxes, and to make payments if they needed [to provide transport animals].   

**Q:**  When did they start that?   

**A:**  This started in the Wood-Horse Year when I was in China.   

**Q:**  What was the administrative status of Chamdo?   

**A:**  It became a Liberation area [Tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ས་ཁུལ] because it was liberated by force. At the time of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, they elected delegates from the Tibetan government, Labrang and Chamdo [Tib. གཞུང་བླ་ཁམས་གསུམ], but since the [Dalai Lama's] government was larger, it had more delegates.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag have any authority over the Chamdo Liberation Area?   

**A:**  No. From the time of liberation, it was administered separately.   

**Q:**  Where did the Chamdo area end?   

**A:**  I'm not sure. I think the Chamdo Liberation Area was regarded to be the area below Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང].   

**Q:**  Was it also Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ]?   

**A:**  No. That was under the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, in India there is a strong feeling that Tibet should include the areas beyond the Yangtze River like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and all of Kham. Was there any thought like this in the '50's in Lhasa, and did they want to tell the Chinese that they wanted those areas?   

**A:**  At that time, the government didn't have any power. Otherwise, before 1933, the areas above [west of] Darstedo were controlled by the Tibetan government and we sent governors like the Nyarong Jigyab [Tib. ཉག་རོང་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] and the Derge Jigyab [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ], and they also sent soldiers to the [different] dzong. So after 1933, [after] there was the fighting with the Chinese Army (Liujun), the area from the Yangtze River eastward became a Chinese area, and the area westwards was a Tibetan area. The Chinese had a large population, so they annexed the Tibetan area like this. We can know this from the Tibetan history. So the government and all people had the thought and the desire of taking back one's own territories.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Khambas petitioned the Kashag saying that we don't want the reforms. What was the Kashag's thought and attitude on this?   

**A:**  My job was to do whatever the kalön said and write the documents, but I didn't have real detailed knowledge of these affairs because I was not among the people having power and discussing things. But in 1957, the Chinese started reforms on the east side of the Yangtze River, and many Khambas could no longer stay there and fled to Tibet. Therefore, we got many petitions asking to be allowed to stay in Powo and Kongpo. At this time, the Kashag couldn't say anything to the Chinese like don't do the reforms. I don't know if the Kashag ever discussed this with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  In the '50s, after Chamdo became the liberation area, did the Chamdo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> have to obey the new orders of the [Tibetan] government or its travel documents?   

**A:**  No. The orders were not working beyond that area because it was a liberation area. I think the border was above Riwoche [Tib. རོ་བོ་ཆེ] and Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན], and on this side it was Lhodzong. The orders and edicts were not issued in those areas because the Chamdo Liberation Committee had started. So nobody would obey the orders.   

**Q:**  Did the government complain about this since it doesn't say anything in the 17-Point Agreement that Chamdo was going to be separate?   

**A:**  The 17-Point Agreement said that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama would have the previous titles and authority as they had when the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama were friendly. But for several years people were wondering whether the terms of the 17-Point Agreement were implemented or not. Later, when it was said the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region should start, there were three separate parts: the government, Labrang and Chamdo.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to India, there was talk about whether he should return or not? And after that, it is said that when the kalön returned from India they gave the secret telegram code book which was given to them by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> for making relations with the US, to the Tibet Work Committee. Is that true?   

**A:**  I never heard about the secret code book. I heard that when the Dalai Lama went to India, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen and the like, told the Dalai Lama that now that he was in India, he should stay and work hard for Tibetan independence. They insisted a lot. At this time, three kalön were there: Ngabö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> and Surkhang. So they told Shakabpa, "If you have the conditions to get independence, it is good. What conditions do you have for getting Tibetan independence?" There were a lot of discussion on this. And in the end, they couldn't specify and show evidence [of] which country was going to help Tibet get independence. At that time, it was the time when Zhou Enlai came to India and the kalön told all of these things to him. Finally, it was decided that the Dalai Lama would return because this time, the Religious Association invited him [meaning unclear]. The kalön probably might have thought that they would have a problem. Later, Ngabö flew back to Lhasa. So I thought that they didn't get along well in India.   

**Q:**  After the postponement of the reforms for 6 years, before this period was over, the revolt took place. So what do you think really lead to the 1959 revolt and later the democratic reform?   

**A:**  In Kham, in the areas [east] of the Yangtze River, they did reforms and the Khambas didn't like these and felt that they couldn't live under them, and many fled in large numbers. And many rumors were spread about how the people could no longer stay under the reforms. In 1956, they [the Khambas who fled] started Chushigandru. They performed a long-life ritual for the Dalai Lama and offered the golden throne. So I think that from then on the Khambas started opposing the Chinese and probably some important people in the Tibetan government might have had connections with them. Looking at this, the nature of the opposition was to disagree about the reforms. And about the revolt, the Chinese asked the Dalai Lama suddenly to go to the Military Headquarters to see a show and it seemed that the Chinese were not going to let him go back. And the masses heard about this and blocked the road since they feared for Dalai Lama if he went, and because of this the revolt occurred. But at this time, in 1956 they said they were postponing reforms for 6 years and were implying that they would postpone again by saying they would see the situation again at that time [after 6 years].   

**Q:**  So what happened in 1959?   

**A:**  The cause of the revolt was that large numbers of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s came and Andru Gombo Tashi founded <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. Andru Gombo started the Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion. At this time, the Chinese told the Tibetan government that they had to suppress them. The Chinese said, "We think all the garbage has come from out there, and if you sweep it out it will be good." I heard that this is what the Chinese said. The Chinese also said that you have to make an order banning them and eliminating them. There was a lot of discussion about this between the Kashag and the Work Committee, and from the end of 1957 through 1958 all of the attentions of the Kashag was doing the work called, "To cease the Khamba disturbance and to mollify the Chinese [Tib. ཁམས་རིགས་ཟིང་ཆ་འཇགས་ཐབས་དང་ཀྲུང་དབྱང་དགོངས་པ་དྭགས་ཐབས]." At this time, China was angry. They were angry because they believed that the Tibetan government was backing and supporting [Tib. ཕུགས་རྩ] Chushigandru. But when the government tried to cease the Khamba's disturbance, the government didn't have the strength/power to suppress the Khambas. The government tried various things such as sending edicts from the Kashag, and the Dalai Lama also sent an written order and on top of those they sent in 1958 Dzasa Minkyiling [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང] and Drepung Ngagpa Khembo [Tib. སྔས་པ་མཁན་པོ] to try to convince them to cease. They took along an order [Tib. བཀའ་ཡིག] of the Dalai Lama, but they still refused to listen and cease. Then, later, they again sent [the monk and lay officials] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] to the Khambas. They stayed with Chushigandru and never returned. After this, on the 29th of 12th month [Tib. རྩེ་དགུ་གཏོར], the Chinese officials came to see the religious dance and they had an audience with the Dalai Lama. The Chinese officers told the Dalai Lama that at the Military Headquarters there was a new show and the Dalai Lama said that he would come. So the Dalai Lama planned to come on 1st of 2nd month. On the day he was to go, all of the Lhasa people showed [up] blocking the way and saying he shouldn't go. So the disturbance started. At this time, the Lhasa people thought that if the Dalai Lama went, the Chinese would seize him and send him to China.   

**Q:**  In the West some say that maybe the Chinese told the Dalai Lama to come alone, but now most people think that maybe some in the Kashag or Taklha [Phüntso Tashi] wanted the Dalai Lama to flee and created this incident in order to create the conditions that would induce the Dalai Lama to flee, and it was not true that the Chinese told the Dalai Lama to come alone. What do you think about this?   

**A:**  The main cause of the revolt was: (1) The Chinese were saying don't bring soldiers to the show in the Military Headquarters. And (2) the Dalai Lama should bring a limited number of servants. I think this is what the Chinese said. The Dalai Lama's Gusung Depön Phüntso Tashi had the responsibility for the Dalai Lama's safety, so when the Chinese said this, he got very suspicious, and this was how it began. The day before the Dalai Lama was supposed to go to the show, the kalön met and said, "Tomorrow there will be no Kashag session as we have to go to the Military Headquarters with the Dalai Lama. So you two do some work concerning the Kashag's diary [Tib. མགྲོན་དེབ], but we won't be coming to meet [you]." So to be truthful, on that day the Kashag was planning to go with the Dalai Lama. Anyway, they didn't want reforms and when the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a>, he had the idea of going to India, but after many discussions, he was brought back. And again in 1956 when the Dalai Lama went to India, most of his retinues wanted him to stay there, but he had to return to Tibet. At this time, I think that the Dalai Lama's not going to the show reveals there was a relationship between the Kashag and Chushigandru. At this time, after the uprising, the Chinese said that the Dalai Lama had been taken by force. The arrangement between the Chinese and the Dalai Lama over the visit to the Military Headquarters was done directly with the Dalai Lama, and not via the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Trindor: When the Chinese invited the Dalai Lama to the show, wouldn't the Kashag discuss about this?   

**A:**  No, we would not know at all. They didn't discuss it at their meetings.   

**Q:**  The invitation was given directly to the Dalai Lama, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, they reported at the Potala.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese say don't bring troops verbally or on paper?   

**A:**  Probably verbally.   

**Q:**  So we heard this may be untrue --that the Chinese never said this condition? That Phüntso Tashi just made it? Is this possible?   

**A:**  Probably, I didn't know whether he did this. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, it was said that they were all uneasy concerning the order to not bring bodyguards troops and weapons.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag tell the Chinese that we must bring bodyguard troops?   

**A:**  No. This is because wherever the Dalai Lama went, Phüntso Tashi and 5-6 soldiers would accompany him, so it wasn't in the Kashag's hands. So they wouldn't have done anything about this kind of issue.   

**Q:**  Did you know that the US and Taiwan were dropping things from planes etcetera at this time, or only later?   

**A:**  I had heard that they dropped a lot of weapons and equipment in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a>; Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] and Lhodzong [Note: He is mistaken. The weapons dropped in these areas took place only after the Lhasa uprising had been suppressed.]   

**Q:**  At that time did you know that?   

**A:**  I didn't [know it].   

**Q:**  Did you hear that Athar and Lotse were operating a secret radio with the US CIA from Lhoka at this time?   

**A:**  No, I didn't know about that, but, But it is probably true.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese told the Kashag that you have to take action to stop the Khambas, why didn't the Tibetan government send its troops to put down <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  They couldn't have done this since the troops were unreliable. They would probably have joined the Khambas. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> was Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] and it was said that he was showing the attitude of hating the Chinese very much, so if they would send people [commanders] like him, it will just become a reinforcement. At this time, the local government told the Chinese, "We can't do anything about the Khambas, you have to handle it." The Chinese had the forces to destroy the Khambas, but it was not right for them to do that. The Kashag used peaceful methods saying that we don't have relations with the Khambas and tried lots of things such as giving advice and sending people, but to no avail.   

**Q:**  Actually, the number of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> forces was more than the entire Tibetan population, and the Chinese had the arms and planes and so on. How did the Tibetans think that they were going to win if they revolted against the Chinese? Did you think the US or foreigners would help or what? What were the Tibetans thinking in 1957-58-59?   

**A:**  No matter [whether] they could handle them [Chinese] or not, the Tibetans from the early times were like this. During 1904, in the English War, the Tibetans fought the British as much as they could with Tibetan matchlock guns and slings, but they didn't have anything they could do when they [the Tibetans] confronted people carrying modern weapons. Later, it was also the same. Since the country had become like this, we had to put forward one's strength, and this was the goal of the Volunteer Army of Chushigandru. Actually, from the beginning, if they knew that they could not handle them [Chinese], then there would be nothing to think about it. [Trindor la said that in 1960 the PLA set out to destroy the rebels in 6 areas, one at a time. He heard that they had 130,000 troops. The 1st area [I think it was Jagra Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར]]. The 2nd was probably in Biru [Tib. འབྲི་རུ] Dzong. In the first they captured 9,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> rebels and killed 4,000. In the 2nd one, killed 7,000 and captured 2,000. At one time Chamdo was almost lost. He says they killed some after capturing them. And the guerrillas didn't do well in the first battle so the Chinese got over confident and the Khambas made better preparations and killed a lot of Chinese, but also took heavy losses.]   

**Q:**  Where were you when the revolt actually took place?   

**A:**  [Trindor:] At that time, I was a child and we received a message saying the Dalai Lama was invited to the Military Headquarters. If we let him get invited, the Chinese would not let him go. So all people should go to stop him on the road and plea with him. Like this, all people went toward <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> and in Shöl they discussed and selected 6 people's representatives. On our side, the house manager of Tsomönling Labrang [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང་བླ་བྲང] and the Gyagpön Inchung were among the representatives. Anyway, at that time, I heard that it was full of people around the stone pillar front of the Potala.   

**Q:**  What date was that?   

**A:**  [Trindor:] Probably on the 2nd.   

**A:**  [Gyegyepa:] This was on the 1st of the 2nd Tibetan month. At that time, I was staying at home. I went to the Kashag and I was searching for some documents and then stayed home. Then I saw there was a kind of commotion in the streets. When I asked what they were doing, we were told that the people were going to plead [with] the Dalai Lama not to go the Military Headquarters. So I thought it was strange. We knew that the Dalai Lama was going to watch the show and the kalön also went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> [i.e., they were acting normal about this]. So I didn't dare to stay idle and I called my colleague, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>'s son Trinley <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] and told him that we should go to Norbulinga since something was going on. So we went on horseback at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a> Hill near the Barshi [Tib. བར་གཞིས] Bridge, but there were so many people there that we couldn't get through. So we had to dismount since there were so many people, and then we went the rest of the way walking/leading the horses. We couldn't go the normal way, and as we went on we learned that Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] Khenjung had been killed by the mob and his body had just been taken away. We went a roundabout way from a road that went around the south and then cut back. We couldn't go the normal way nor did we dare try. When we went through the Mani Prayer Wheel turned by water, we saw the gate of Norbulinga was closed [at this time if a person had short hair, the people would say he's a Chinese spy and beat him---Phagpalha was on a bicycle but was wearing a face mask and common clothing]. [[Not in the tape] Trindorla says: I remember that the Korchagpa [the Mayor of Lhasa's messengers] went around saying that we had to block the road from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> since there was a danger the Chinese would steal the Dalai Lama. Later some people when asked by the Chinese who started the revolt they said the Korchagpa, as they didn't then realize the right answer was the Kashag.] In front of the closed door were some young <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> standing guarding it. At the same time as we arrived, Magji Künsangtse Dzasa also arrived, so they opened the door and let us in. Then we went to the Kashag meeting place in Norbulinga and found that Surkhang, Liushar and Shasur were there. In the Kashag, it was full with tsidrung and lay officials, and some representatives of the people. Surkhang and the other 2 were standing facing the crowd. Someone in the crowd said to them, "Don't allow the Dalai Lama to go to the Military Headquarters." Then the 3 kalön left to go to the Military Headquarters and we followed behind them to the door. They were going to tell the Chinese that today the Dalai Lama couldn't come. As soon as they stepped outside the door, they were met by about 12-13 representatives of the people [the representatives were picked informally that morning by large groups of people to speak on their behalf asking that the Dalai Lama not to go]. Among them was Tadang Regiment Gyagpön Injungla [Tib. ཨིན་ཆུང་ལགས], Phala Chandzö Pegong [Tib. སྤེལ་གོང], Manang Abo, Shölpa Tatonga [Tib. ཞོལ་པ་རྟ་གཏོང་བ] and there were others I didn't know. They were kind of blocking the door. They said, "Don't allow the Dalai Lama to go to the Military Headquarters. [It's] like handing over the sheep to the butchers. If you send him to the Military Headquarters we are unable to bear this. So the kalön should do something." Many people yelled things like this. Then Phüntso Tashi took photographs of the crowd from on top of the door. Then the 3 kalön went to tell the Chinese that them the Dalai Lama couldn't come.   

**Q:**  Did you go with the kalön?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. Then there was a meeting of all the officials in the Shabden Lhagang. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Tsewang Rinzin [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རིག་འཛིན] came late in a car with some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> soldiers as bodyguards because he was a Vice Magji, and the crowd threw stones at the car. They might have thought it was Ngabö, or it might have been because of the PLA troops in the car. The stones injured Sambo. Sambo was injured and sent by car to a clinic [the Indian Consulate]. Ngabö didn't get to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> because he was supposed to go to the Tibet Autonomous Region and then come to Norbulinga, and he couldn't come. For the meeting in the Shabden Lhagang, all of the government officials were called, and in the meeting, the people's representatives said that, "We can't bear that the life safety of the Dalai Lama is at risk, so we cannot stay idle, no matter what, we would have to confront." From then on, it was said that we must differentiate the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> eaters and the rice eaters. Then all the people there signed their names [to an oath] saying, "We can't bear the responsibly of causing harm to Buddhism, the politics of Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama's life safety. So we all will have unity/solidarity. From then on, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> fighters surrounded Norbulinga. [Trindor: From Lhasa, many miser brought their bedding and went to volunteer to fight at Norbulinga.] Then the kalön returned [from meeting Tan Guansan] and told the crowd that it was okay to return home since the Chinese agreed that Dalai Lama didn't have to come to the watch the show. However, even later that night, there were many people still there. So from then on, the split between the Chinese and Tibetans was clear and they posted guards at the doors of Norbulinga. Then they set up a Military Command Control Headquarters [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་བཀག་བགོད་ཁང] and from then on, the Kashag stayed in Norbulinga for 24 hours a day. The Magji of the [Command] Headquarters were Tsipön Shükhüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ], Khenjung Lodrö Kelsang [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་སྐལ་བཟང], Khenjung Kelsang Ngawang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ངག་དབང], Kündeling Dzasa, Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན], Rimshi Lobsang Tsewang [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་དབང], Lhalu, and Khenjung Tara. There were about 8-9 main heads. The meeting at Shabden Lhagang continued for two days. Then the Dalai Lama summoned some officials and told them that it was not all right to have a meeting at Norbulinga, so after two days, they moved the meeting to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Parkhang. The Dalai Lama seemed angry about this [the meeting in Norbulinga]. However, he Command Center Headquarters stayed in Norbulinga [Not on tape: The <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>=was=now=involved=in=discussing=what=to=do,=and=everyone=spoke=and=told=things=about=Tibetan=history=and=anti-Chinese=comments]. During the 2nd day, since Ngabö hadn't come, they sent me to Ngabö's house. The message I brought for him was, "The Dalai Lama has sent the tsondu out of Norbulinga and the Kashag is doing whatever it can to calm the disturbance. So we want to know what are your thoughts and advice."   

**Q:**  Did you ride a horse there or go by car?   

**A:**  There was a car for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a>, but I went to his house on horseback. Ngabö was there and when I told him what the Kashag had said, Ngabö said, "This situation is very bad. However, the Dalai Lama's order was very good. But, however much you hit a lump of solid things, it is extremely difficult to make it into small pieces/granules. Each individual issue must be discussed and then there can be good advice [Tib. རྡོག་རྡོག་གཅིག་གི་སྒང་ལ་ག་ཙད་གཞུས་ན་ཡང, དེ་སིལ་བུར་ཧ་ཅང་འགྲོ་ཁག་པོ་རེད་འདི་ཚོ་མིརེ་ངོ་རེ་གནས་དོན་བཀྲོལ་བྱས་བཀའ་སློབ་གནང་ན་ཡག་པོ་ཡོད་རེད]" [Note: this was a criticism of just moving the <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>,=rather=then=getting=down=to=real=issues=about=them=and=their=disturbance]. Then he also said, "I can't come today, and I will take a week's leave" and he sent a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> through me. I told the Kashag exactly what Ngabö said. Meanwhile, the tsondu continued at the Parkhang on the 4,5, and 6th of the Second Tibetan month [13th, 14th, 15th of March]. I heard that the tsondu talked about: 1. Going to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> in the hospital and apologizing to him and give him some gifts. 2. Discussing the situation peacefully with the head of the (Chinese) Military Headquarters. I was not able to go to the meetings, but they selected many representatives. Then on the 3rd or 4th, I was again sent to Ngabö. At this time, I was told to take a secret code book for telegrams that consisted of numbers and letters to Ngabö. This was so that the Kashag and Ngabö could exchange talks. And I was told to ask Ngabö what other opinions he had for the Kashag. When I went to Ngabö, he replied, "If the kalön have made their determination, then that's it [means they decided to oppose China, there is nothing he can do]." His expression showed that he didn't like it. Then I asked him on behalf of the kalön what was going to happen from the Chinese side, and he said, "I live near the bridge and at night when I go to bed I heard continuous car noises all night, so they [Chinese] appear to be making tremendous preparations. So the kalön should consider this well." Then I returned and told the kalön what Ngabö said. I never went with a message again.   

**Q:**  I don't understand. Was there a machine with the secret telegram code book?   

**A:**  It was not a telegram, it was just letters [code] for sending secret letters. Then from the 5th on I stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> at night. Many members of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> were coming to the Kashag to ask something in a very hurried manner on the evening of the 7th, On the 9th [this must be the 8th since Dalai Lama fled on the 8th at 10 o'clock in evening] the kalön told me, "Now whatever happens it is not good to stay here like this surrounded by the mimang. It is not certain whether the Chinese would cause disturbance [go on the offensive]. If a disturbance flares up, the Chinese will fire artillery shells here. Then it is finished. Cannon shells have no eyes, so for the time being, the Dalai Lama and Kashag are moving the capital to Lhoka. All of the retinue of the Dalai Lama have to take a very strong oath not to tell this to anyone. We should take you with us, but we have to leave you so no one will realize we kalön have gone. If people realize that we are gone, there is a great danger, so temporarily you stay here. We will do something soon. Sitsab Lobsang Tashila will come and do everything as if the Kashag was still here and you should report the things and pass down the orders." This was on the 8th and I said, "Whatever happens take me with you. It is my duty to bring and the keep the Kashag's seal. It is not okay at all if it would become a situation like the master could get through, but the servant couldn't get through [Tib. དཔོན་ཐར་ནས་གཡོག་མ་ཐར]. So please take me." Surkhang, however, insisted saying that, "This is a critical responsibility, so you must stay here. If this secret gets out, it is finished." So I said, "If it's like this, I'll stay." So when many people came to meet or give requests to the kalön on the 9th, we said they went to report to the Dalai Lama. Since I was there, people believed this and the Dalai Lama left on that night. [[Not in the tape] Trindor heard that this was just a story let out to those like Gyegyepa so that when the Chinese found out he was gone, they would think he had just gone to Lhoka. If they really planned to stop there, there was too much of a danger that the Chinese could drop troops behind them and cut off the escape.]   

