# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0011.03 : Tape 3  
##  Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** June 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 69  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyegyepa [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ] was a lay aristocratic government official who served with Lhalu in Chamdo. After this he was sent as a staff officer in the Dalai Lama's new Bureau Office in Beijing. He returned to Lhasa in 1955 and worked in the Kashag as a gadrung. In this interview, he discusses the Command Center in Norbulinga in 1959 and communications between Ngabö and the Kashag, and then details the shelling and casualties in Norbulinga in 1959. He describes how the Dalai Lama left Norbulinga in disguise and also analyzes the situation between the Tibetan government and the landholders who had their land confiscated by the government.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0011_03/H_0011_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  In the Military (Command Center) Headquarters, Tsipön Shüküpa was there.   

**Q:**  Was that the Shüküpa who is now in America?   

**A:**  Yes. After he was released he went there. And there was also Rimshi Lobsang Tsewang. While I was in the Kashag, Sitsab Lobsang Tashi and Khenjung Tara came to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> Kashag.   

**Q:**  Where was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> then?   

**Q:**  He had gone to India in 1957. He said he was going on a pilgrimage. Then I told Lobsang Tashila what the kalön had said about his coming and that I would serve him by making reports, etcetera. This was on the 9th. Tara and those people probably invited him to the Kashag. At this time, the Chinese broadcast amplifiers were playing loudly. They said a lot of propaganda things like, "You should control yourselves. If not, we are preparing a meal for you and we are going to serve you a Chinese radish." This implied that they were going to fire their cannons.   

**Q:**  Did you have any contact with Ngabö after this?   

**A:**  I had no contact with Ngabö. Then on the evening on the 9th, Ngabö's lay official bodyguard, his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a>, Rabgang Tashi Wangye [Tib. རབ་སྒང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་རྒྱལ] came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. He brought a secret letter in code for the Kashag. We told him the Kashag was in a meeting with the Dalai Lama, so he probably kept the letter. Then on the morning of the 10th at around 2-3 a.m., the shelling began. The Chinese were shelling from Nortölinga and the Gusung Regiment which was next to Norbulinga, were firing cannons back to Nortölinga. Near them was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Regiment [Gyantse Regiment]. They were firing rifles etcetera. [Trindor: We were awoken by the noise. Everyone in our courtyard was up.] Then at almost sunrise on the 10th, at (Command Center) Headquarters, there was no other choice but to fight, right? So Shüküpa and those people [in the Command Center] told me to make an edict to all the monasteries and all the palaces, so I wrote it. In it it said, "Now the Tibetan people have risen up and are opposing the Chinese Communist Party. Now we are in the midst of our fight. So, headed by the monasteries, all the people should keep in mind that for the sake of the religion you should serve in the war and provide arms and the salary." I wrote about 15-20 of these and placed the Headquarters' seal on them.   

**Q:**  You didn't have the seal, right?   

**A:**  The Kashag's seal was taken by the kalön but the box was left there. Then I sent it out for distribution. All of this is the truth. The shelling was terrible in Norbulinga. Houses were brought down and people were killed and wounded. Every shell that went over us would still break the glass in the windows. At about 10 a.m., Khenjung Tara took a machine gun and bullets and went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a> where he fought along with some soldiers [to try to recapture the hill]. After awhile, because of the shelling, all of the people were scattered. [Trindor says he had a friend on Jogpori who told him it was hopeless; that they were shelled by artillery and had a hard time to find a place to hide, let alone shoot.]   

**Q:**  What happened to the coded letter?   

**A:**  Later, Lobsang Tashi said he got it from Rabgang, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, Tara, and I opened it and saw it was in code. We didn't have the code book, so we couldn't read it.   

**Q:**  Trindor: Earlier Ngabö had sent a real letter to the Kashag saying, "Tan Guansan has a plan to save the Dalai Lama and it would be good if you can pave the way for him. If this isn't possible, send me a map of where the Dalai Lama will be." Did you know about this?   

**A:**  I just heard that the Dalai Lama wrote a letter through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚན་ཞབས] The religious debating assistants of the Dalai Lama.">Tsenshab</a> Gyatsoling [Tib. མཚན་ཞབས་རྒྱ་མཚོ་གླིང].   

**Q:**  Trindor: This letter didn't reach the Kashag and it was directly delivered to the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Probably. I don't know in detail. I heard that Tan Guansan sent a letter saying, "We can't bear the responsibility if you stay like this because cannon shells have no eyes. So it is dangerous. You should go to the Military Headquarters."   

**Q:**  Trindor: On the morning of the 10th, the [Chinese] soldiers arrived, right?   

**A:**  They had not arrived at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> at that time but by about noon or 1-2 pm. on the 11th, the soldiers had taken control of Norbulinga and they arrested us.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Drepung monks saw that many riders were going towards the south of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> ferry site.   

**A:**  Yes. When the Dalai Lama left he went via the south door dressed in a common <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and went straight to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> ferry site on foot. The rest of them, the Kashag, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> members and the tutors, went by car to Kündeling's new house and from there by horse. I think this was true that they saw the riders.   

**Q:**  When did Tara and those people flee?   

**A:**  Tara was there in the afternoon on the 10th, and must have fled just before the Chinese took over. Taring was taking photos at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> during the morning shelling. I saw him taking pictures of the Jensel Phodrang [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་ཕོ་བྲང], which was half blown up.   

**Q:**  You were unable to flee, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you went with Lhalu to Chamdo what kind of work did you do?   

**A:**  I was staff. Then Bumtang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] and I [were] in charge of the horse corvée tax [Tib. རྟ་སྤྱི]. After that I was sent as a salt tax collector [Tib. བལ་དམར་ཚྭ་ཤོ] in an area just below Nagchuka and I worked there for about a year.   

**Q:**  When Lhalu left, the staff was left there as before, right?   

**A:**  My work had finished before that and I had been appointed as the one in charge of the Payroll Office in Sog. It was under Chamdo.   

**Q:**  The other staff people were left there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  We heard that Lhalu was enthusiastic about making war against the communists and had tried to make war plans with the heads of the Nangchen and Derge. Was this true?   

**A:**  When he was there, there was no big fighting, but there were some small skirmishes at the borders. At this time, the government had stationed many soldiers on the border like at Mankham, etc. There was no plan to go on the offensive as far as I could see, but I didn't know things in detail.   

**Q:**  You mentioned a discussion between Ngabö and Che Jigme in Beijing, what was it about?   

**A:**  I don't know in detail, but in general, one of the main issues was the property of the Panchen Lama's relatives and friends such as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> and the officials like the favorite, Jensel Lobsangla [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་བློ་བཟང་ལགས]. Altogether there were about 100 of those whose property had been confiscated by the Tibetan government after the Panchen Lama fled. And the Panchen Lama's father was put under detention in Norbulinga. So returning all of their things was the main issue they discussed. Then in addition to this, there was the issue of collecting the tax of one-fourth of the military's salary [Tib. དམག་ཕོགས་བཞི་ཟུར]. In the past, when the Tibetan government attacked the British, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> had a very hard time and they had to pay one-fourth of the military's salary. At that time, the Panchen Lama said that we don't have the means to pay one-fourth of the military's salary and sent [as proof] many land tenures documents issued in the past [that exempted them from taxes]. However, in short, they imposed the military salary tax on Tashilhunpo. So it was said that the Panchen Lama went to China was to collect donations to pay the military salary. The main thing was that they [Labrang] was charging the Tibetan government compensation for the losses that they suffered. This was the internal discussion between Ngabö and Che Jigme. Finally, Labrang borrowed a little more than 40,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> from the Tibetan government to be used for bringing up the Panchen Lama [from China] to Tibet. I heard that this payment was written off, but actually it was not settled.   

**Q:**  When you were in the Dalai Lama's office in Beijing, what were the contents of the secret code telegrams you sent?   

**A:**  We didn't have any important things to talk about because we were staying in the Chinese land. We were sending telegrams about the arrival of the tour groups and so on. It was supposed to be for sending information about the situation there. In the past, when they set up the Nanjing Office, they had the secret code and they were supposed to send [things] like information on Tibetan issues, but we didn't have the authority to send those things.   

