# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0011.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** June 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Gyegyepa, Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ, བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 69  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyegyepa [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ] was a lay aristocratic government official who served with Lhalu in Chamdo. After this he was sent as a staff officer in the Dalai Lama's new Bureau Office in Beijing. He returned to Lhasa in 1955 and worked in the Kashag as a gadrung. In this interview, he talks his life and work during this period.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0011_01/H_0011_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  At first I was in Chamdo, then I came to be a gadrung.   

**Q:**  Did you go with Ngabö?   

**A:**  No, I went with Lhalu. When my work in Chamdo was finished, I went to work in the Sog Salary Office [Tib. ཕོག་ཁང] in Sog Tsedengun. Now it is under Bachen Dzong [Note: in Nagchuka on the Kham border].   

**Q:**  Abo Raga came to Chamdo for what reason?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  After the liberation of Chamdo, when did you go to Lhasa?   

**A:**  At the time of the liberation of Chamdo, I was in Sog Tsedengun in Bachen Dzong. I was the head of the Sog Salary Office. This was an office that gave salary, in grain, to the soldiers going to and from Kham.   

**Q:**  So you weren't arrested with Ngabö?   

**A:**  No. I heard about that, but didn't see it.   

**Q:**  What happened to you after the liberation of Chamdo?   

**A:**  At the end of 1951, I returned to Lhasa. After the liberation of Chamdo, the soldiers all returned to Lhasa, so there was no work. So we returned also.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag order you back?   

**A:**  We wrote to the Kashag saying there was no longer any work, so we also returned. That's how we returned. In May of 1951, when the 17-Point Agreement was signed, we had already left Sog and were in Nagchuka. When I was in Nagchuka, I heard that Wang Qimei and some military officers were coming to Lhasa from Chamdo. After the 17-Point Agreement, the Tibetan border guards were gradually withdrawn. About two months after I returned to Lhasa from Nagchuka, Wang Qimei arrived in Lhasa. At first, Ngabö and Wang Qimei were coming together, but when they reached Kongpo Giamda, Ngabö stayed at his estate there for a few days and Wang Qimei came earlier. When I returned from Nagchuka I had no immediate position. So when Wang was coming from Kham, a welcoming committee was set up and I was appointed to work with that group. The heads of that welcoming committee were Kheme Sonam Wangdü and Liushar Thubden Tharpa. They were the liaison officers. Then under them were the monk officials Thubden Lodrö and me. We made preparations for them at the Dingri Magar near <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ཀ] A park/grove in the southeast part of Lhasa by the river.">Tsidrung Lingka</a> [Note: in the south of Lhasa]. These troops came from Chamdo.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers came with Wang Qimei?   

**A:**  I'm not sure how many soldiers. There were 5 groups of officials, one was the Silingpu [the main military headquarters], another were [from the] Relations Office [Tib. འབྲེལ་གཏུགས་ལས་ཁུང]. I, myself, saw about 400-500 soldiers at this time. I acted as a liaison like this for several months. Phüntso Wangye came with Wang Qimei as translator. Then before the time of Hriyi (10/1) in 1951, I think [it was really 1952] I was sent to China to work in the new Dalai Bureau Office [Tib. བེནཤི་ཏྲུ]. This was a little after the Respect Groups [Tib. གུས་བཏུད་ཚོགས་པ] [Trindor says this group's name was the Tembü Tshogpa (Tib. རྟེན་འབུལ་ཚོགས་པ)] that were headed by Liushar [went to Beijing]. They had to be there by the 10/1 national holiday, but we didn't. So we left afterwards. There was also a sightseeing group [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ] that went. It also had to arrive before the 10/1 holiday. Zhang Jingwu and Alo Budrang came through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s house. Their liaison was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla and the other was... . At this time, the Dalai Lama had not yet come to Lhasa. After this Zhang Jingwu met the Dalai Lama. He (Zhang) came before him to Lhasa. After them, Wang Qimei came to Lhasa. After him, the main military force [Note: the 18th Army Corps] under Zhang Guohua came. At this time, the Dalai Lama's Bureau Office was set up in Beijing with six officials. The senior head was Ramba. The junior head was the monk official Lobsang Tenzin. Under them were Janglojen Lhundrup Namgye, Khenjung Tara, Bargang Shöndrön Lobsang Thundrup, and me. This was in 1951 [Note: This was in 1952]. One group went by land and the other by sea. Liushar and a few others went by sea, but most went by land. So I stayed for 3 years in Beijing working in the Dalai Lama's Bureau Office.   

**Q:**  Did you learn any Chinese?   

**A:**  We had a special teacher for Chinese, but I was older and it was hard to learn, and I wasn't very interested in learning. I didn't have much enthusiasm.   

**Q:**  What did your office do during your three years there?   

**A:**  There was not much work. The main work concerned contacts with the Chinese Nationalities Commission and publicity meetings of the government. And we sent information back to Lhasa and received information from them. We also acted as a liaison for the groups and students coming from Tibet. Under the Dalai Lama's Bureau Office, we set up several sub-sections, and I was in charge of material possessions/things. So I studied a little Chinese, but basically I didn't study much and it was a waste of time for me.   

**Q:**  Did they send telegrams about what was happening, and were there secret telegrams?   

**A:**  Yes, the telegrams were in code. The Kashag had a code book and we had one. So we sent things in code, but there was really nothing in the telegrams that was secret. They would send one saying that a tour group was coming and we would send [one] back that they had arrived. In the past, in Nanjing, there was a bureau office at the time of the Guomindang. After this, there was a bureau office in Chongqing. The Tibetan tour groups went via Chongqing, so we thought it would be useful to have an office there. So we asked our government if we could again set up a bureau office in Chongqing, and they said yes. So we sent Tarala and Lobsang Thundrup to open that office. Chongqing was very hot in summer. So they stayed in Beijing during the summer. and in the winter, they stayed in Chongqing.   

**Q:**  Did your salary and expenses come from the Tibetan or Chinese government?   

**A:**  They both came from the Chinese government.   

**Q:**  Who was in the Kashag at this time?   

**A:**  Surkhang, Ngabö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>, Shasur, Thubden Ramyang and Dombaw. Dombaw was in the Kashag when I went to Beijing.   

**Q:**  What about Lhalu?   

**A:**  He was an ex-Kashag minister after he came back. He had the title of ex-Kashag Minister [Tib. བཀའ་ཟུར], but had no work. The Kashag said he didn't have to come to work in the Kashag.   

**Q:**  What did these officials who went to China and friends think about the 17-Point Agreement? Did they think that it would work?   

**A:**  We thought that there was no way to stop the Chinese. Tibetan lands are without a doubt Tibetan. Additionally, the Tibetans have always worked there to make their livelihood. There was a connection definitely between Tibetan and Chinese history, but it was a relationship of protection, help and concern, nothing else. There were many wars between Tibet and China, and because Chinese troops came, people might have thought that Tibet was under China, but the Tibetan customs of working and eating, etcetera, couldn't be changed into Chinese ones even if Tibetans lived in China. After the Agreement was signed, whether peaceful or militarily, we thought that now we had fallen under China, and a new system and customs would come. But we were not sure what would come. In the Agreement, it said that in Tibet, there were many points, such as that there would be a Military Administrative Committee. So I thought that there would be big changes in Tibet. My own thoughts were that the old system and government were excellent. E.g. we thought that the government was great, and [we] didn't see that it wasn't being implemented well at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> level. I thought that this was a time when we would have to compare the old system and the new ideas. At this time I didn't have any enthusiasm for changing the old system, even though I could see that the time to compare and evaluate it had come. In 1954, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama went to Beijing. I was there then. I did a lot of work at that time. [Trindor says that when Kheme Dzasa returned from Beijing, he is said to have said to people, friends and so forth, "Ri bsnyil nas thag pas sdum yas med. After the mountain has had a landslide, you can't tie it back up with a rope (tie it back to normal)."]   

**Q:**  I heard there were three factions in Tibet: those who liked change, those dead set against it, and those in the middle.   

**A:**  I can't say exactly who was in favor, who was against, and so forth. After the liberation of Chamdo, Ngabö and Wang Qimei had conversations in Chamdo, and came up with three points that Ngabö had accepted and had sent to the Kashag. I heard this, I didn't see it. These three points were (1) the border defenses would be done by China. (2) We accept that Tibet is a part of China. (3) In Lhasa, a Chinese Bureau Office would be set up. And if these three were accepted, then the Chinese army wouldn't invade the rest of Tibet. Then they went to Beijing and the three points turned into 17 points. People said that this increase in points was a bad thing for Tibet. In the 17-Point Agreement, there were specifics written about the Dalai Lama's government and Panchen Lama's, and there was also criticism about this. [I.e. That it shouldn't have been mentioned]. The main ones openly opposing the 17-Point Agreement were Alo Chöndze, Apju [Tib. ཨ་ཕྱུག], Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] Trunyi, Chandzö Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], and Gamigang Chöndze [Tib. ཀ་མིག་སྒང]. They gave a petition to the Shö ga. They were the Mimang Tshogpa [People's Association]. The people behind the People's Association were the two sitsab.   

**Q:**  What was in the petition?   

**A:**  I don't know precisely, but I suspect it was that Tibet shouldn't have reforms.   

**Q:**  When they did this, were you in China or Lhasa?   

**A:**  Oh, I think I was still in Lhasa. Then they dismissed the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>. [Note: That occurred in April 1952]. Yes. Yes, it was. I think I was in Lhasa. At this time, Zhang Guohua told the Kashag to investigate this People's Association and find out who was in it, etcetera. Later it came to be said that the 2 sitsab were the ones against reforms. When Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, and Wang Qimei met [with] the Kashag or sitsab, they came to meet them in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>'s Ewang Room. So at this time there was a discussion with the two sitsab about converting the Tibetan Army to the People's Liberation Army and changing the soldiers' uniforms. The sitsab said, "Da lta chab mdo nas mgo rdung de khrag ral ma skam bar dmag mi 'gyur bcos byed yag yong gi ma res [The blood from hitting us on the head in Chamdo is not yet dry so there is no way to do reforms]." At this meeting, Wang Qimei and Fan Ming were there. So from this time, the difficulty between the two sitsab and the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] began, and from then on it only got worse. And later, the sitsab were the ones who were blocking reforms and changes. The Chinese said the sitsab opposed the 17-Point Agreement, and the Chinese petitioned the Dalai Lama and the Kashag about this, saying that they were destroying [inhibiting] progress. The Kashag discussed this and petitioned the Dalai Lama, and he agreed to their resignation. Most <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> believed that the sitsabs' actions were correct, whether or not they said that openly. I also thought that they were correct in their views.   

**Q:**  [Tashi Tsering says:] I heard that at one meeting in Ewang, Ngabö said, "First we must have reforms," and that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, "Mi yul 'od kyis rgyang rang yul mun pa sgrib [The other's land is filled with light and our own land is covered with darkness.]"   

**Q:**  I didn't hear that. I heard that when there was [this] comment made when a lot of Tibetan troops sent to the border to fight the Chinese soldiers, and that this caused great suffering for the miser. Then I heard that Ngabö said, "Nga <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོ] A group, an administrative unit, a nomad group.">tsho</a> mar phabs byas, gcig byed dgos kyi 'dug zer" [This refers to before war and seems to mean that he was saying that when we went down there (to Chamdo) we had to do something, meaning negotiate with the Chinese]. So he had a real long view; foresight.   

**A:**  When the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and Zhang Jingwu first met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> [they said, "In the past, there was] a Chinese Amban called Zhang Taren [who] came and did a lot of good work, and helped us and then returned home to China. You have the same name, Zhang, so please be like him and return after your work." Zhang laughed and said, "Don't worry, we can discuss these things later." And then Lobsang Tashi said, "Tibet is poor and there is not much grain. So if you bring a lot of soldiers the people's food and livelihood will deteriorate." [This is what Trindor recalled.]   

**Q:**  Was the real reason for the People's Association the increase in prices or was that just an excuse?   

**A:**  There were two People's Associations. There was inflation. When the Dalai Lama returned from China to Lhasa [in 1955], the People's Association came to welcome the Dalai Lama. I was in China then. When the Dalai Lama went to China, I don't know much about that since I was a lower official. We heard that the Dalai Lama was coming for a tour. I don't know how it came about, but probably the Kashag recommended that the Dalai Lama should go. And after the Dalai Lama was in China, he was invited to the Chinese People's Assembly. At that assembly, he was given the rank of Uyöndrang Shönba (Vice President).   

**Q:**  Did you go with the Dalai Lama wherever he went?   

**A:**  Yes. After the 10/1 holiday and celebration, the Panchen Lama and Dalai Lama went separately on tours of China. The Dalai Lama went to the northeast and Shanghai. We were given permission from the Nationalities Commission to accompany him [we six in the Bureau Office]. There were about 40 people travelling with the Dalai Lama on tour from Lhasa, and [in total], about 100 persons [including those from Beijing]. This was 1954.   

**Q:**  Were you there when the Dalai Lama met Mao?   

**A:**  No. I was a lower official.   

**Q:**  Mao put forth the idea to have an autonomous region, did you hear about this in China or was it secret?   

**A:**  There was talk of Mao saying that we didn't have to start the Military Administrative Committee. Gradually it could be started. At this time, some group of younger officials in Lhasa were saying that it would be good to institute a Military Administrative Committee. So when the Dalai Lama came to China, there was talk that Tibet didn't have to start the Military Administrative Committee, but could start an Autonomous Region. And after the Dalai Lama returned to Tibet, he started the work to implement the Autonomous Region. At this time, reforms had started in Tibet and a (Tibetan government) office called the Reform Office had begun. The heads of it were Shasur and Dombaw.   

**Q:**  Did you think that having an Autonomous Region was good or bad?   

**A:**  I didn't pay too much attention to it, but I thought is was good, since it said rang (one's own) gyong (rule), and that was good if we ruled our own area. So I thought it was good. There was also the idea floating around that the Chinese attitude was that Tibet was very poor, so they had come to help, and after things improved and they were done helping, we (the Chinese) would return home. But of course it didn't say anything like that in the 17-Point Agreement. [Tashi Tsering: I also heard the same thing. That the 3 feudal lords (Tib. ངདགསུམ) had exploited the misers a lot and after we (the Chinese) help the misers get on their own feet, we will return home. And Mao told the Dalai Lama, "Now we are helping you. After 20-30 years, please help us." This was bazaar talk. It wasn't in the 17-Point Agreement.]   

**Q:**  What was the relationship between the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama's office and officials?   

**A:**  You are probably right that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> and Kashag didn't get along. The ones advocating for reform in Tibet were probably Che Jigme and Lhamön Yeshe Tsultrim. At this time, they had many disagreements about the old society, and the 9th Panchen Lama had fled to China and Che Jigme also fled to China. And then they wanted to return with troops and the Tibetan government refused. Later, in 1954, when the Panchen Lama and Dalai Lama came to China, Ngabö and Che Jigme had secret discussions. They met and generally settled things about the relations and issues outstanding between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and shung. And they decided that gradually they could settle the remaining issues. In the 17-Point Agreement, it said they should settle the issues harmoniously. There were many outstanding issues to settle. At this time, Ngabö told people that they had come to an agreement in principle. So in 1956, Chen Yi came from Beijing as China's representative to the opening of the Tibet Autonomous Region's Preparatory Committee. After this, the Dalai Lama went to India. Having done this, many people in Lhasa wrote petitions asking for the "reforms" to be postponed. The People's Association made connections with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> and a petition was sent to the Tibet Work Committee. After this, while the Dalai Lama was in India, China agreed not to implement reforms right away. At this time, we were all called to the old Yuthok house and it was announced that reforms would be postponed for 6 years. In the 17-Point Agreement, it said, if the people want reforms it can be done. There were a few people who probably wanted reforms, but most, like Sendregasum, wanted none.   

**Q:**  While the Dalai Lama was in India, were you in China or India?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa. I returned at the end of 1955. I started my work as Kashag <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> in 1955. When I first came back from China I spent a few months in the Judicial (Gyurship) Office. Then I was appointed gadrung. I was appointed before the Dalai Lama left for India.   

**Q:**  At this time, who was in the Kashag?   

**A:**  Ngabö, Surkhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>, and Shasur. In 1956, at the start of the year, Liushar and Yuthok were appointed as katsab. This was before the Dalai Lama went to India.   

**Q:**  Who were the Tsipön?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, Künsangtse, Tsögo, and Shugöpa. Tsögo had been <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>, and then when he was appointed tsipön, I got the gadrung post.   

**Q:**  What work did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> do?   

**A:**  We did whatever the kalön said to do. There were normally 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> and 2 gandrön. Sometimes there were extra ones but normally there were these 4. The gadrung's work was to make (write) whatever letters, documents, orders, recommendations were to go to the Dalai Lama, and write the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩ་ཚིག] An edict, e.g., from the Kashag.">tsatsig</a> (laws) to the dzongs, etc. The Kashag's seal could only be applied by the 2 gadrung. Even if the kalön were there and the gadrung were not, the kalön couldn't affix the Kashag's seal. This had to be done by the gadrung. This was an old custom. The seal was kept in a small box and locked. The kalön tripa (the head kalön) kept the key for this.   

**Q:**  Who was the kalön tripa at this time?   

**A:**  Surkhang. He was the oldest. Then later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> was appointed as kalön. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a> were both the ones which the people had to give petitions to the Kashag, and we would give the answers (decisions) from the Kashag to them. If you were under the rank of rimba nga bey leytsen [5th rank), you had to give your petition to us, but if you were 5th rank or over, you could send requests to the Kashag directly. There were other things, but these were the main tasks.   

**Q:**  At this time, how were relations done (conducted) between the Kashag and the Chinese offices?   

**A:**  From when the Chinese first arrived in Tibet, there was a close relationship between the Chinese and the Kashag. In 1956-57, there was a great uprising in Kham and Khambas came to Tibet. In Tibet, Andru Gombo Tashi and Chamatsang established the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> Regiment. Most of the Kashag's work, literally every day in 1957-58, was concerned with trying to stop the Khambas' disturbances, and apologizing to the Chinese for this. The Khambas were causing disturbances and were killing and stealing from people. The Chinese would give us reports all the time and tell us to put a stop to this. But the Kashag had no effect [since the Khambas didn't listen]. The Kashag and Chinese officials were discussing this situation all the time. The Chinese thought that the Tibetan government was secretly supporting and backing the Khambas, although they didn't say this openly.   

**Q:**  Were there different factions at this time in the Kashag?   

**A:**  Later this became very clear. Ngabö was for putting into practice the 17-Point Agreement. Most others were against it. [He implies that those in jail later were against it and those who were not in jail were for it. So you could tell clearly who was on which side]. Around 1952, the Chinese officials would come to the Kashag if they wanted to speak with them. Later, the Kashag had to go meet the Chinese at Yuthok. I had to go with them and take notes on what they said, and then give this to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to China, in the West, it is said that Trijang Rimpoche and Lobsang Samdenla encouraged the Khambas to rebel. Is this right?   

**A:**  Trijang Rimpoche visited Chadreng Monastery on the way back from China. He probably talked about religious things and it is unlikely he talked about revolting. I haven't heard that. After Trijang left there, the area broke out in rebellion, but I don't think there was a relationship. There was talk that he instigated the revolt, but I don't believe it.   

**Q:**  [Tashi Tsering:] What were the factions in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> regarding the return of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  There was an article by Lhautara in the Political Consultative Conference series on this. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> was on one side for going to India and working for independence, and Bumtang Chömphel Thubdenla and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Shölkang were the main ones arguing for returning. If we went into exile [they said] nothing useful would come of it, and returning would be better than that. Finally they couldn't agree and there was a divine lottery to decide the issue. Lhautara watched the lottery carefully to see whether there was any manipulation.   

**Q:**  What was the relationship between the Tibet Work Committee and the Kashag? Did the Kashag have to ask the committee to make new rules?   

**A:**  No. After the establishment of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Kashag kept making rules, etc., as before. It didn't have to ask the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. Appointing officials for the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was mainly done by Ngabö, and then Chinese officials.   

