# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0102.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Gu Caoping  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** 1996  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Gu Caoping  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 77  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gu Caopin was a military officer in the 18th Army Corps who was born in 1919. In 1937 he was a middle school student in Beijing, but after the Japanese war started he joined the Red Army. He was part of the People's Liberation Army army that defeated the Tibetan army in Chamdo in 1950 and went on to Lhasa after the 17-Point Agreement was signed in 1951. At this time he was the deputy commander of its 154th Regiment.Soon after arriving in Lhasa with the advance troops, he led a batallion to Shigatse. In this interview he talks about the military and political policies of the Chinese in Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 02  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0102_02/H_0102_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  As for how to deal with the people from Xikang, I don't know. I never heard that there was a policy to force them back to Xikang. (for more than one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  During that period in Tibet, there were some people doing small business such as vendors who were not directly governed by the local government. I wonder what was the policy issued by the Tibet Work Committee toward those people during that period?   

**A:**  (another person speaking in Chinese said) You mean the people such as those who came with performing monkeys and caused trouble that was threatening public security?   

**Q:**  Yes after ...(not clear)...the people from Kham were sent back. What was the situation then?   

**A:**  Those people might be homeless vagrants (Ch. mang liu) who threatened public security then. So sometimes we sent them back.   

**A:**  (another person speaking in Chinese said) Those people trained monkeys and made monkey tricks (Ch. shua hou), which caused trouble and made many people unhappy. So the people in Tibet asked us to drive them away. As far as I know, we sent those people back. Whether they had some relationship with the Kham people or not I don't know. The task of sending back those people who had monkeys doing tricks was done by the government of Tibet and the government of Xikang together.   

**A:**  Yes, because we wanted to maintain a good social order we sent those vagrants back. This is true. (for about one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  Did it happen in 1958?   

**A:**  It happened in 1957. I don't remember it clearly because it was not a very important event. After we sent them back, there were very few those vagrants. (for half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  During that period did Kashag have some plan to send the Kham people back?   

**A:**  I don't know. (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  During the period from 1957 to 1958, some Kham people started the rebellion in Kham. Those Kham people were all single-minded, and they wanted to make some trouble or to do preparatory work to start a rebellion. At that moment did you already know they would start a rebellion, or did you know nothing about it? Later on, the Kashag supported the rebels and their activities. So during the period from 1957 to 1958, did you think the officials of the Kashag were very single-minded about supporting the rebels? What was the situation then? Could you please say more about it?   

**A:**  I have thought about this problem. Certainly we would oppose them if they wanted to do a full-scale armed rebellion. Yet they insisted in starting it. For me at that moment, that they launched the rebellion it was completely unreasonable and unexpected. I couldn't understand why they wanted to start it? How could they defeat the PLA? Since the Central Committee had already told them that if you started a rebellion we would suppress it, why did they still launch the rebellion? For me, I didn't expect that they would start the rebellion at all. At that moment I thought they wouldn't dare to do it. Since they were destined to lose, why did they still do it? However, though at that moment I couldn't understand it, later on gradually I started to understand. During that time, we left the old institutions of Tibet unchanged. The old feudal serfdom remained. After we entered Tibet, we made friends with some of the former upper-class feudal serf owners. Some of them gradually understood our policy. We asserted that we would start the reforms through peaceful measures--we would first give them a good arrangement for their lives and work matters, and until then, we wouldn't start the reforms. Some of our open-minded friends thought this policy of ours was very good, so they didn't have any worries at that moment. There were lots of people behaving like this, such as Ngabö Ngawang Jigme, Phagpalha Gelek Namgyal, among others, who didn't fear our reforms then. However, there were also some former serf owners who still regarded serfdom as the best institution in the world. They thought that even though we had said policies such as "Six Years No Change," and even claimed that the reform could be postponed according to the future situation in Tibet, since the PRC is under the leadership of the CCP, anyway the reforms would happen at some time in the future. Therefore, they thought that as time went on, the possibility of starting the reforms was increasing. As a result, they decided to make trouble by taking advantage of the Kham people. For the Kham people, the Kashag should have given them jobs and houses and let them live there peacefully, according to the position of Central Committee. However, though in appearance the Kashag accepted the Central Committee's position to settle the Kham people down, actually, the Kashag was taking advantage of them to start the rebellion in order to achieve their goal that the reforms would never start, and thus the serfdom society would remain forever--which was their true intention. Therefore, geting the ruling class to give up their status is always a tough task. Though the situation was really disadvantageous for them, they still tried their best to struggle. According to my idea, the reason why they launched the full-scale rebellion in 1959 lies in this point. At the moment when they started the rebellion, they didn't think they had any hope to win. If not like this, why did they flee? So they didn't have the prediction that they could win. They just didn't have any other choice. (for about five minutes, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  In the past I interviewed an old Tibetan aristocrat. According to him, at that moment they thought they could get substantial help from the U.S. Government. And in fact, the U.S. Government did airdrop some materials for the Kham people. So, during the time did you consider the possibility that the U.S. Government might give help to the Kham people?   

**A:**  Yes. The U.S. Government had offered help to the Kham people, and they even sent some agents into Tibet. Yet full-scale support such as dispatching the army to join in the battle was not possible. The terrain of Tibet is so complex that the U.S. Government was not able to dispatch a large number of soldiers to Tibet. At most, they could airdrop some materials, send some agents, or use some transmitter-receivers to communicate. So we didn't think U.S. Government could dispatch an army directly then. (for two minutes they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  After the rebellion happened, the PLA started to suppress the rebellion. So how did the PLA suppress it? Did the PLA dispatch troops from Gansu or Inner Mongolia to go to Tibet to suppress the rebellions one dzong after another gradually? Or did PLA do so in other ways? Can you talk more about it?   

**A:**  Before March of 1959, both the PLA troops and our people entering Tibet to work, did all our work completely based on the requirements of the 17-Point Agreement. If you know this point, you can understand our actions more clearly, can't you? We strictly observed the Agreement, and would never do what the Agreement forbade us to do. For example, since the Agreement required that the affairs of public security be under the charge of the Kashag, we would never intervene in those matters. However, after they launched the full-scale armed rebellion, the situation changed, because they themselves had breached the 17-Point Agreement. According to this new situation, the Central Committee and the State Council of China issued a policy that called for: quelling the rebellion and at the same time starting the reforms (Ch. bian ping bian gai). Yet as for quelling the rebellion in Tibet, since the territory of Tibet is so large, it was impossible for us to do full-scale quelling, because we were not able to dispatch so many troops, and let alone that, there was another problem--how to transport supplies for these troops. Though at that moment both the Sichuan-Tibet Road and the Qinghai-Tibet Road had been built, and some roads were also built within Tibet, since the rebels were mainly doing activities in remote areas, after leaving the nearby areas next to the roads, our troops still had to face the problem how to get food and other supplies. Therefore, during this period we were not able to dispatch a very large number of troops. Thus, based on this situation, we implemented a plan: 1) first we should disable the rebels who were near the areas next to the roads, in order to make sure our transport could operate safety, since not only us but also the people in Tibet needed supplies from outside Tibet; and then we should disable the rebels in the remote areas; 2) first we should disable the rebels near the border areas; and then we should disable those within the inner areas of Tibet. As a result, after finishing the Lhasa Battle, we directly we went to Lhoka to attack the rebels there. Because at that moment the Indian government supported the rebels by transporting weapons and bullets across the border into Tibet, we decided to go to Lhoka. After occupying Lhoka, we managed to cut off the route through which the rebels could get help. Although, to be sure, after we cut off the borderline, the rebels could still get some supplies from airdrops. Therefore our guidelines were: first attack borderline areas and then the inner areas; and first attack the areas next to the roads and then those remoter. That said, since the territory of Tibet is so large, we decided to focus our troops on the local areas one by one. Only after disabling all the rebels within one local area, we would move on to the next area. (for several minutes, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  (not clear)...when was it made?   

**A:**  After the rebellion happened, it was gradually made. After occupying Lhasa, we turned to Lhoka. After occupying Lhoka, we decided to eliminate the rebels one area after another. These guidelines were gradually made by the Military District in 1959. (for about one minute and a half, they talked in Tibet)   

**Q:**  In 1959 after the rebellion, Dalai Lama escaped out of Tibet. During the time, it was said that the Central Committee ordered you not to block him. Is it true?   

**A:**  Yes, it is the truth.   

**Q:**  Was this order from the Central Committee?   

**A:**  Yes it came from the Central Committee. The Central committee told us: if he wanted to escape, you shouldn't stop him, because since the Dalai Lama led some troops to escape, if we stopped him, very likely we would have a battle with his troops. If so, the battle might threaten the Dalai Lama's life. Since the Dalai Lama is regarded as a living Buddha, he had very high authority in Tibet. If...   

**A:**  (another person interrupted speaking in Chinese) At that moment we were afraid that if we had a battle with Dalai Lama and his troops, during the chaos if some of the rebels killed the Dalai Lama and then framed the PLA, saying that it was PLA who killed Dalai Lama, it would be very bad. There was a possibility of this conspiracy.   

**A:**  Yes. If so, it would be very difficult for us to clarify the truth and to face the Tibetan people. Thus, in the end we just let Dalai Lama go. (for about one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  After the rebellion happened, the U.S. Government helped these rebels and had airdropped some agents into Tibet. And then, some of these agents were found and arrested. So, when they were interrogated, what did they say? Did they tell you what their tasks and intentions were? I once encountered a former agent who previously participated into this task and is now living in India. Yet he doesn't know what those captured agents had said about it.   

**A:**  These agents who were airdropped into Tibet carried transmitter-receivers. We captured some of them and seized their transmitter-receivers. However, these captured agents knew nothing about the specific place where they received training, as well as the background of the people who gave them training. When the agents were trained in the US, they were never told where they received training because the US people also feared that they might leak the information in the future. The agents also told us how they received the training, and how they established contacts with the rebels on the ground. And also, after quelling the rebellion, other groups of agents entered Tibet as well and they hid in Tibet mainly in order to collect information about us. All these agents actually knew nothing about the general situation, because their trainers had never told them about this background information--the trainers just taught them how to communicate by means of transmitter-receiver, how to get food in the wild, how to collect useful information about the PLA, and how to establish contact with other rebels on the ground, etc.--yet with regard to the more in-depth information, these agents knew very little in fact. (for about two minutes, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  I met some former agents who participated in the airdropping done by US government and are now living in India. According to these agents, their tasks then included two points: one task was to try to collect information about the PLA; the other task was to try to persuade and to organize the masses and the Tibetan officials within the local CCP governments in Tibet in order to resist the PLA together. So, did the captured agents tell you their other tasks besides those two?   

**A:**  After quelling the rebellion, these agents were not able to organize people to resist the PLA, because during this period when they were airdropped on the ground, if the masses found them, the masses would capture them and then send them to us. As I told you a moment ago, we carried out the policy of quelling the rebellion and meanwhile starting the reform one area after another. The key task of the reforms, was to mobilize the masses to overthrow serfdom completely. So after the reforms the masses can become the leaders of Tibet. In the past, the serfs had suffered a lot, which was very evident. Therefore, after being liberated, they regarded the PLA and CCP and Chairman Mao as their saviors, so they wholeheartedly and firmly sided with the CCP. So the agents' attempt to organize the Tibetan people to resist PLA, was destined to fail... The agents might have had this sort of task. For example, in an area near Linzhi, we once found one case of this sort. Some agents landed there attempting to incite the masses in a nearby area. Yet the masses told us about them very soon, so they failed to organize the masses. (for about one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  So what did the captured agents say about their tasks?   

**A:**  There were mainly two tasks: trying to detect us and to collect information; trying to help the underground rebels within Tibet and to communicate with foreign people by means of transmitter-receivers. (for more than one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  In 1959, the rebellion happened. Some people from Kham and the pastoral areas participated into it. I once talked with some of them. Did the rebels join in the rebellion in an organized way? Or did they do so just in a scattered and unorganized way? What was the situation then?   

**A:**  They joined the rebellion in an organized way. For example, at first they had a troop called, "Four Rivers, Six Ranges" (Ch. weijiao jun). In the areas near Bianba (Phembar), Luolong dzong, Shibanduo (Shopando), we once captured the general commander of their troop in these areas. So obviously they resisted us in an organized way in the local areas. In the areas between Qinghai and Tibet, namely those near Nierong Zong  

