# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0102.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Gu Caoping  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** 1996  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Gu Caoping  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 77  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gu Caopin was a military officer in the 18th Army Corps who was born in 1919. In 1937, he was a middle school student in Beijing, but after the Japanese war started, he joined the Red Army. He was part of the People's Liberation Army army that defeated the Tibetan army in Chamdo in 1950 at which time he was the deputy commander of its 154th Regiment. He went to Lhasa with the 18th Army Corps after the 17-Point Agreement was signed in 1951. Soon after arriving in Lhasa, he led a batallion to Shigatse, and then to Yadong. In this interview he talks about his experiences.   

---  
### Tape 01  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0102_01/H_0102_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The first question I would like to ask you, is how did you join the army? How did you join the 18th Army Corps. Could you please tell us something about that?   

**A:**  I was born in 1919. In 1937, when the "July 7th Incident" (Ch. qiqi shibian) happened, I was attending high school in Beijing. When the Japanese army invaded China, I joined the army. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan for Goldstein)   

**A:**  After joining the army, I worked in the mountain area of Taihang (Ch. taihang shan) for some time. Later on I went to the area of Eastern China (Ch. huadong) to work. I stayed in the area of Northern Jiangsu Province (Ch. subei) to work. In 1946 when the civil war was on, the Military District of Henan-Anhui-Jiangsu (Ch. yuwansu junqu) was established, so I was appointed to work in this military district. After the end of Huaihai Battle (Ch. huaihai zhanyi), the 18th Army Corps was established. Then I was appointed to work in the 18th Army Corps. (for about a minute and a half talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  Most of the main forces of the former Military District of Henan-Anhui-Jiangsu, were organized as the troops of the 18th Army Corps. General Zhang Guohua served as its commander. I served as the director of Battle Department (Ch. zuozhan kezhang) in the 18th Army Corps. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  Later on we were in the Battle of Crossing River (Ch. dujiang zuozhan). Our troops went to Jiangxi Province and Hunan Province. Later on, we went to Chengdu in Sichuan Province, by way of Guizhou. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  After the end of Chengdu Battle, in January of 1950, our troops were ordered to enter Tibet. On January 7th, we received this order. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  After receiving this order, in April, I was appointed to work in the 154th Regiment of the 52nd Division of the 18th Army Corps. I served as the deputy commander of the 154th Regiment. Our regiment was among the first troops entering Tibet. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  First we arrived in Ganzi. And then we reached Dengke, which was next to the Jinsha River. We had gone toward Chamdo by way of Yushu, in Qinghai. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in a regiment?   

**A:**  About 3,000 soldiers.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in a battalion?   

**A:**  600 soldiers or so. 500-600 soldiers in every battalion. There were three battalions in one regiment. And besides the battalions, the regiment might also have some Intermediate Companies (Ch. zhishu liandui) which were in charge of matters such as communication, reconnaissance, and arresting deserters.   

**Q:**  How many regiments were there in a division?   

**A:**  Three. The organizational structure of PLA was "3 x 3 Structure" (translator's note: namely, every unit in PLA has 3 suubordinate units). (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  I heard from others that when the troops of the 18th Army Corps were entering Tibet, they did lots of training work in Ganzi to get the solders adapted to the climate of the mountain area. So at that moment, how much information did you have about the situation of the Tibetan Army (Ch. zang jun). Did you think the military capacity of Tibetan Army was rather weak, or did you know nothing about it?   

**A:**  The task of our regiment, which was first dispatched to go to Ganzi, was to collect information there and to try to know the situation, including information about the Tibetan Army. Since we had already arrived in Kham next to Jinsha River (the Upper Yangtze river), we knew a lot of the situation there. Namely, we knew thoroughly and clearly about the situation of Tibetan Army. Therefore, we had concluded that the Tibetan Army was really weak. At that moment they did not have very much battle experience and compared to the battle capacity of our PLA troops, they even couldn't withstand a single blow from us. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  At that moment, we had a slogan: we didn't fear that we were unable to defeat them; rather, we only feared that they would escape so that we couldn't disable them [as a fighting force]. (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  During Chamdo Battle, did the troops of the 18th Army Corps start the battle strictly according to the battle plan made previously, or did the troops start the battle according to the new situation on the battlefield?   

**A:**  We just strictly implemented our previous plan. The most important part of our battle plan was that our regiment should approach a place (not clear) west of Chamdo by way of Yushan and Nangqie (Nangchen) so as to cut off the route through which the Tibetan Army might escape. This was the most crucial part of our plan. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  Did you go there by way of Dengke, from the north?   

**A:**  Yes. We went there by way of Dengke and Yushan, in Qinghai. And then, we turned south by way of Nangqie. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  When you crossed the Jinsha River, did you encounter the troops of the Tibetan Army there?   

**A:**  On May 15th, 1950, when our troops arrived at Dengke, which is next to the Jinsha River, we didn't see the Tibetan Army on the opposite side of the river. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan). We made some boats there. With regard to other troops crossing the river, such as those that started out from Batang and Gangduo of Derge, they encountered the Tibetan Army and fought with them when crossing the river. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  After you crossed the river, when did you encounter the Tibetan Army?   

**A:**  After left Nangqie. In Jiashaka, Youji, and Enda, we encountered them. Yet we encountered only small numbers of their troops. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  How did the 154th Regiment and the Cavalry Unit (Ch. qibing zhidui) from Qinghai establish a cooperative relationship? Did you two start the cooperation according to a previous plan, or only after you arrived there?   

**A:**  It was done based on the plan. According to our battle plan, this group of troops, led by Yin Fatang who was the deputy political commissar of our 52nd Division and Li Min who was the chief of staff of our division... Yin Fatang and Li Min were ordered to command our regiment and the Cavalry Team together, as one group of troops. (for about half a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  When your regiment and the Cavalry Team encountered Tibetan Army, how did you attack them? How did the infantrymen and cavalrymen cooperate together to fight? How did they advance in two different routes?   

**A:**  After reaching Nangqie, we the infantrymen, went toward Jiashaka, while the cavalrymen went toward the right, by way of Zhiyaqiao in the west. Both of us went together... (unclear)... via different routes. The cavalrymen were ahead of us . (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  You said you knew this route was really very dangerous because of the tough terrain where the mountains were very tall. Though the troops of Tibetan Army should be familiar with the terrain, they lost. Do you think the reason why they lost lies in that their commanders failed to make good military arrangements, or lies in that they were not well equipped in weapons, or lies in that...(unclear). You as one of the commanders of the battle... What is your opinion about why Tibetan Army failed?   

**A:**  The reason why Tibetan Army failed lies in that we used the good tactic of trying to encircling them all. After we managed to cut off their route of escaping, they lost their morale right away. After Ngabö arrived at Chamdo, he ordered the troops of the Tibetan Army to withdraw toward the west. At first he wanted to lead the troops back to Lhasa. However, even before they reached Enda (not clear), we had already occupied Enda. So, under this situation, he had to order the Tibetan Army to surrender. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  Along the way we encountered some small groups of troops of the Tibetan Army and fought with them. For example we fought in Jilu. Those small units of troops came from Yunnan, Batang, or Gangdu. We had small-scale battles with them. Among all these battles where we confronted each other, most of the time, we failed to disable them since their speed of escaping was very great and they were adapted to the climate and therefore we couldn't catch them. However, for those that happened in a situation where we took the tactic of encircling them and then attacked them at night, we were able to manage to disable them all. (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  It is likely that the tactics used by Tibetan Army were too simple. However, it is also very likely that since they were very familiar with the terrain of the mountain areas, if they had insisted in taking advantage of the commanding heights along the way to defend some sites for some time, they could have caused considerable troubles for the PLA. Yet, in the end, they failed to make this sort of threat to the PLA. So what is your opinion of the battle plan of the Tibetan Army? Were there some problems with their battle plan?   

**A:**  There were several problems with the Tibetan Army's plan. First, the number of their soldiers was too small. They had only 5,000 to 6,000 people or so in total. Yet at the same time they had to defend a very large amount of places, from Dengke to Yunnan. As a result, in every site, there were only a small number of Tibetan soldiers there. At most they had a battalion or a regiment to defend a site. Every Daiben (depön-commander) led 500 soldiers. Yet the 500 soldiers were not defending a site together. Rather, they were scattered in different places. As a result, their soldiers were not enough, so they were not able to defend any sites along the way since their number of soldiers was so small. When we confronted them and started to fight with them on the battlefield, they could only withstand our attacks for several hours, or at most for half a day, and then, they had to withdraw. (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  At that moment, the troops of the PLA had just finished the civil war, so our troops had lots of battle experience. Yet the troops of Tibetan Army had not participated in any large-scale battles. Once they did some small-scale battles in the areas next to Jinsha River, but besides these, they didn't have much battle experience. (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  Besides taking the tactic of encircling and then attacking, were there some other tactics used by PLA? If the Tibetan Army escaped beforehand, the previous plan of encircling and then attacking would not be implemented. If the Tibetan Army managed to escape, would you have stopped at Chamdo or continued to advance?   

**A:**  Our plan for 1950 was just to occupy Chamdo. The severest problem we faced then was not about military issues. Rather, it was about how could we find food to eat. In that year, we just planned to reach Chamdo. If they could manage to escape, we would not have advanced further to chase them. (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  After the Chamdo Battle, did you go to Tibet or to some other area?   

**A:**  After Chamdo Battle, the troops of our regiment were stationed at Laolongdu and Shibandu (Shopando). All the other troops withdrew. Since our regiment had been adapted to the environment of the highland area, only our regiment stayed there, and we started to make preparatory work for advancing in the next year. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  At that moment we had a plan A as well as a plan B. Plan A was that we should try to solve the problem peacefully, namely via our work of political persuasion (Ch. zhengqu gongzuo). If plan A failed, certainly we would march into Tibet. Yet at that moment, the chief problem I had to confront with was the problem of food/supply shortages. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  As as result, after crossing the Jinsha River, our troops had two tasks: first, we should prepare to fight so as to disable all the troops of the Tibetan Army who were stationed next to the Jinsha River, since they were the main force of the Tibetan Army. At that moment, some people within Tibet didn't want to cooperate with us. The reason why they didn't cooperate with us was that they thought they could rely on the Tibetan Army. If so, if we could disable all their troops, they would lose their hope and would bargain with us. That was the first task. The second task was to try to solve the problem peacefully. Even before crossing Jinsha River, we accepted a task: "trying to establish friendly relationship with the Tibetan people." At that moment we had "10 Great Policies" (Ch. shida zhengce), and we educated our soldiers by means of the 10 Great Policies. Therefore, wherever we arrived, our troops never confiscated the masses' private houses to lodge in, and we permitted the officials of the old local governments there to continue to hold their positions. We never bothered the lives of the masses, and respected the Tibetan officials of the local government. So even though at first some local officials didn't trust us, later on, all the local officials welcomed us. And also, along the way, we made friends with many Tibetan people, such as the abbots of the monastery of Luolong Zong, Lani of Zhituo Monastery, the county heads of Bianba (Pemba) and Shibiandu (Shopando). Later on we made friends with each other. (for about two minutes, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  As far as I know, when doing battles, the troops of the USA will first dispatch some scouts to do reconnaissance work in the area close to the troops of the enemies. So at that moment, did your troops dispatch Tibetan people of Kham or Han Chinese people as scouts to do reconnaissance work?   

**A:**  We dispatched some local Tibetan people to do reconnaissance work, because the Han Chinese people could not communicate with them since they couldn't speak Tibetan. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  After the winter of 1950, the PLA dispatched a vanguard team (Ch. xianqian zhidui) which was led by Wang Qimei and Zhang Guohua. Did you work in the vanguard team?   

**A:**  Yes, I worked in the vanguard team. I served as its deputy chief of staff. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  Wang Qimei worked mainly in non-military positions (Ch. jiguan deren). The main troop of this team was actually one company which previously belonged to our regiment, consisting of about 200 soldiers. My work was to command that troop. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  Can you say something about your experience from here [Sichuan] to Lhasa?   

**A:**  After Wang Qimei arrived at Luolong dzong, I joined the vanguard team. Where were our troops stationed? It was in Luozhuge (unclear). When we reached there, the weather was good: it was warm so there was not much snow. So generally speaking, we advanced smoothly. At that moment, the Kashag dispatched some officials to welcome us. They dispatched the officials to a place 25,000 meters away from Jiali to welcome us. So on the way there we advanced smoothly. When we reached Jiali, we had eaten up the food we carried. Since Ngapoi (Ngabö) Ngawang Jigme was with us... the Kashag and Ngapoi sent some people to find grain for us in Jiali. And the masses also gave us some firewood, since at that moment the peace agreement had been signed. (for more than one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  After the PLA arrived at Lhasa, the PLA encountered some difficulties. Is it true that at that time some soldiers of Tibetan Army attempted to spit at the soldiers of PLA and to curse at you?   

**A:**  After we arrived at Lhasa, generally speaking, most of the people welcomed us. For example, when we,the members of the vanguard team,were entering Lhasa, Tibetan troops, the masses, and the officials all welcomed us. They gave us houses, foods, and firewood. According to my memory at least, at that moment the Kashag observed the requirements of the Agreement and helped the PLA be stationed at Lhasa. Only a minority of the people spat at us. Yet most of the masses welcomed us. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  Before you arrived at Lhasa, had you considered the possibility that some people might spit at you and curse at you?   

**A:**  At that time, we knew clearly that although the peace agreement had been signed, we, as the comrades of the PLA, would still need to be on high alert. Yet after entering Lhasa, we soldiers didn't encounter any attacks. One week after we arrived at Lhasa, one battalion, the 3rd Battalion, was left at Lhasa; and then, I led one battalion to go to Shigatse, and the headquarters of our regiment led one battalion to go to Jiangzi (Gyantse). It is really a long way from Lhasa to either Shigatse or Jiangzi. Yet every time when we went to Lhasa to attend meetings, we only led several cavalrymen and no attack against us happened. Namely, the masses along the way were all very friendly to us. After we arrived, a small minority of the people made troubles, which we had expected before. Yet the number of the people making troubles was very small. These people did so either because they didn't know the situation or because they opposed us. Yet generally speaking, most of the Tibetan people were willing to cooperate with us. (for about a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  Were there three battalions there?   

**A:**  Yes. There was one battalion stationed at Lhasa, one at Shigatse, and one at Jiangzi. (for about 15 seconds, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  I led the 1st Battalion to go to Shigatse. After we arrived at Shigatse, the Tibetan Army there welcomed us. And the Dzasa Lama of Tashilhunpo Monastery also welcomed us, since at that moment the Panchen Lama had not returned to Tashilhunpo Monastery. (for about one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  In 1952, when the illegal People's Congress (Ch. wei renmin huiyi) was held at Lhasa, some people encircled the PLA troops stationed at Lhasa. Was the situation then dangerous?   

**A:**  When the illegal People's Congress was held, I was not at Lhasa. I was in Shigatse. The Military District and Work Committee frequently told me the situation. At that moment, the vanguard troops of the Panchen Lama had also arrived at Shigatse. After they arrived, we had more communications with the people outside the PLA, so we knew the situation then. It was not possible that the people would be able to drive the PLA away. (for about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  The nature of the illegal People's Congress was chiefly about a political struggle, rather than a military struggle. Yet the Military District still made some military arrangements in case of the worst possibility: for example, we dispatched more troops to go to Lhasa. The 115th Regiment was dispatched to go to Mozhugongka (Metrogongka) from Jiali. And one battalion was also dispatched to an area near Lhasa from Longzi dzong. So in the end we dispatched almost one regiment to go to the areas near Lhasa. Anyway the struggles around the illegal People's Congress were chiefly political struggles, though in military matters, we also made some preparations. (for more than one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  At that moment, those people didn't have enough power to drive us away. It was impossible for them to do that. (for about half of one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  In 1952, when the turbulent situation happened at Lhasa, the number of Tibetan Army troops was large: they had about 1,500 soldiers. What was the number of the PLA troops there then?   

**A:**  At first, within urban Lhasa, for PLA troops, there was only one Garrison battalion (Ch. jing wei ying), and the 3rd Battalion, and some non-military CCP organizations (Ch. jiguan). So we had more than 2,000 people in total. Let me think...we had 8 companies consisting of more than 1,000 people, and also, we had people who worked in non-military positions then... So in total we had at least 1,500 people at Lhasa. So though they had 1,500 people, we had 1,500 people as well, which means that it was impossible for them to drive us away. In addition, we dispatched one regiment from outside. (for about half of one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  Later on, did you continue to stay at Shigatse, or go to Lhasa or any other area to work?   

**A:**  I continued to work in Shigatse for some time. And then, in July of 1951, our regiment went to Yadong. (for about half of one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  (some people other than Gu Caoping said in Chinese) It should be in 1952.   

**A:**  Oh yes it should be in 1952. In July of 1952, we went to Yadong. During that period, the severest problem for the PLA was how to get supplies, because at that moment Chairman Mao, the State Council of China, as well as Central Military Committee, made one regulation: all the people entering Tibet, including both those of PLA and those of non-military organizations, were forbidden to get financial support from the local governments of Tibet in case the Tibetan people might suffer an additional burden. So sometimes when we needed grain, we might buy some from the local government. The local government had granneries where some grain had been kept there for many years--some of these grains were kept there for more than ten years, or even more than twenty years. So they might sell some of this sort of grain to us. That said, most of the time we had to rely on the grain transported from the inland area (Ch. neidi) to Tibet. This grain had to be transported from Xikang by means of yaks. The people of Xikang supported us a lot--they used yaks to transport supplies from Xikang to Lhasa or Shigatse. And also, there was another way of getting supplies. At that time, the Indian government was friendly with us. Once by way of India, we got 2,500 tons of rice. The rice was imported into Tibet by way of India. The reason why we went to Yadong, was that we had to reach there to get the rice. We went to Yadong to build storage houses for keeping the rice, and also to build roads to transport the rice from Yadong to other areas of Tibet. (for about one minute and a half, they talked in Tibet)   

**A:**  The rice was first transported by us from Guangzhou to Calcutta in India, and then the rice was transported to Gangdu (Gangtok) by vehicles. And then, we went to Gangdu to receive the rice. (for about one minute, they talked in Tibet)   

**Q:**  Was the rice transported into Tibet in this way only one time or for many times every year?   

**A:**  Only one time in that year. In Yadong, we organized some people to go to Gangdu to receive the rice.   

**Q:**  Before the road was finished, the severest problem for us was how to get food. Besides transporting food from Yadong and Xikang, sometimes we got grains from Northwest China by camels. And also sometimes we could buy some food from the local areas. Because we paid them silver coins for the grain, the local people were willing to sell grain to us. In addition, our troops also planted grain and vegetables by ourselves. For example, after we arrived at Lhasa, we established a farm called the "81 Farm". And in the next year, we harvested grain from this farm. Therefore, by means of all these methods, we managed to solve the problem of food-shortages. (for more than two minutes, they talked in Tibet)   

**Q:**  After 1956, rebellions happened in Xikang, and then some rebels entered Tibet. According to common sense, when these rebels were entering Tibet, if the PLA blocked and attacked them then right away, all these rebels would have been disabled easily. However, only after 1958 when United States had airdropped some weapons to them, and when the rebellion had escalated, did the PLA start to attack them. Why? Why didn't PLA block and disable those rebels at the very beginning? What is your opinion on this point?   

**A:**  We took actions according to the Agreement. Namely, the Agreement for the peaceful liberation of Tibet, the "17-Point Agreement". According to this Agreement, on the one hand, the PLA dispatched some troops into Tibet for affairs of national defense; on the other hand, it was about the affairs of diplomacy: all the affairs of diplomacy of Tibet would be in the charge of Chinese Central Committee. Except for these two points, all other aspects of old Tibetan society such as the old Tibetan local regimes remained the same. We didn't change them at all. We didn't intervene in the internal affairs of the Kashag. As a result, those people went to the areas which were governed by the Kashag. Under this situation, the Central Committee had to ask the Kashag to solve the problem by itself. Thus, we couldn't attack the rebels directly. After receiving Central Committee's order, the Kashag asserted that they would solve this problem. However, though in the name they said they would solve the problem, the Kashag actually supported the rebels. (for about one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  So the Kashag was in charge of local public security. (for about one minute, they talked in Tibetan)   

**A:**  At first, the people entering Tibet from Xikang, didn't show hostility toward the PLA. They didn't attack us then. Under this situation, we couldn't attack them first. (for more than two minutes, they talked in Tibetan)   

**Q:**  In 1957, many Han Chinese comrades were staying at Lhasa. So the Work Committee (unclear) made a list, and prepared to send some of these Han Chinese back to inland China (Ch. neidi). During this period, there was a rumor that the Work Committee also asked the Kashag to make a list of the Khambas (Ch. kangba ren) with the intention of sending these Kham people back to inland China as well. As a result, many Khambas feared that they would be sent back to inland China as well. So they escaped to Lhoka. Could you please say something about this matter? Why did the Work Committee want to send these Han Chinese comrades back to inland China? And what about the rumor about the Khambas?   

**A:**  During this period, the Central Committee... According to the Agreement, democratic reforms would be launched in Tibet. Yet at that moment, the upper-class people of Tibet feared and were opposed to the reforms. So the Central Committee issued a policy of: "(for) Six Years No Reform" (Ch. liunian bugai). As a result, since the democratic reforms would not be launched in the near future, many of our comrades didn't have any tasks to do in the local areas of Tibet. During this time, both the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama put forward that they wanted to start the reforms. Yet later on the Central Committee found that, in fact, most of the people feared the reforms so the Central Committee not only made the policy of "Six Years No Reform", but also pointed out that if next in the third "five-year plan" (Ch. wunian jihua) the situation was still not mature, the reform work could be postponed once again. The Central Committee decided that only after they themselves were willing to start the reforms, would the reforms be launched, since according to the Agreement, the work of reform could only be done by the upper-class people of Tibet themselves and by Dalai Lama. If they were not willing to start the reforms, we could postpone it. It should be Dalai Lama and the people of Tibet who decided whether to start the reform or not. We strictly observed the Agreement.   

