# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0008.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Dzogchen la [Tib. རྫོགས་ཆེན་ལགས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Unknown  
**Name:**  Dzogchen la [Tib. རྫོགས་ཆེན་ལགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1933  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dzogchen La was a dobdo monk from Deyang College who served as chandeba and geyog. In this interview, he describes his work as a geyog and how he played the long horn and the gyaling (clarinet). He also describes one of the beatings he gave as a geyog and the pole that they would use for the beatings. He then talks about when he joined the dobdo tobtsang and the games that they would play. Finally, he discusses the fighting and competition the serving dobdo monks engaged in while serving rice gruel (Tib. thukpa), and his experience while serving as chandeba.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0008_01/M_0008_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I was born right here in Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག]. This house in which we are talking is the same one that I grew up in.   

**Q:**  Your house is great! It might not be like this in the past, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I renovated it. I became a monk at age 5. My tratsang was Deyang. My gegen was from a big shagtsang. He was the abbot of Deyang Tratsang and we call him Khen Rimpoche [Tib. མཁན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. His name was Shenyen Tsöndrü la [Tib. བཤེས་གཉེན་བརྩོན་འགྲུས]. I stayed there for awhile and then the eldest gidru got separated. Then I became the abbot's servant, söpön [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན].   

**Q:**  How many people were there in your shag at first?   

**A:**  There were 6 people including the abbot.   

**Q:**  Was the abbot your relative.   

**A:**  Oh yes. He was from Thambag. He was from the family Sharkor [Tib. ཤར་སྐོར]. He was the abbot for about 11 and half years and he died just at the end of his 12 years term when he got a stroke. That was the year when his turn for giving the tonggo for the Lama Rigdra [Tib. བླ་མ་རིགས་གྲྭ], but he died before he did this and we weren't able to handle it. In the Rigdra, for 16 days you have to serve the assembly tea, mangja [Tib. མང་ཇ]. This was done by collecting the things from the miser and giving it to the commom monks. At that time, the 5 gidru said that we are unable to give the Rigdra tonggo. So the tratsang took care of it and gave the tonggo for the Rigdra. Then after the Rigdra, we 5 gidru were given shares of the shagtsang's things and we stayed separated into our own shag.   

**Q:**  Where you a pechawa or lagyüba?   

**A:**  I was a lagyüba. At that time, I was 16 years old. Then I did the post of chandeba [Tib. ཇ་འདེད་པ] at Mönlam for 4 years age the 16-20. [This is reserved for Deyang monks]. I had to go with and supervise the Olo who serve tea at Mönlam. I carried a stick then and had to say, "come quickly." The chandeba is the person who drives the Olo who serve the tea to the monks. I did this for 4 years.   

**Q:**  How did you get the post?   

**A:**  I had to ask for it. I had to ask the Deyang Nyertsang for this job Then after a few years I got the post of assistant gegö, geyog and did it for 2 years. I was about 25-26 when I did that job.   

**Q:**  Did you have to ask for the geyog post also?   

**A:**  Oh. Yes, you had to ask by finding a backer [Tib. མགོ་འདྲེན].   

**Q:**  Do you still have your geyog dress and ornaments?   

**A:**  No, these were all robbed [Tib. འཕྲོག]. (in 1959). They even robbed my food cleaver. While we were kept in the Drepung stone floor making us to put our hands our heads, the soldiers searched all our rooms for things. I did the geyog for 2 years. The first year I was the servant for the chagdamba [Tib. ཕྱག་དམ་པ] and the second year I was assigned to the northern area of the middle circle, Barkor Changa [Tib. bar skopr byang ma] in the Jokhang. It was the area around the Tara Temple, Drölma Lhakhang [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང].   

**Q:**  What was your work there?   

**A:**  Geyog were posted at different places to keep order at the Mönlam. This was the year [1958?] when the Dalai Lama came to Mönlam [Tib. ཚོགས་ཕེབས] for his Geshe exam [Tib. མཚན་རྟགས]. It was a very elaborate ceremony on the Mönlam and the government gave the tönchen [Tib. སྟོན་ཆེན] where a very large pile of fried cookies was placed in the courtyard and let the people grab it. Then in betweeen the Mönlam and Tsomgö the revolt took placer.   

**Q:**  After your gegen died, did you stay alone in your shag?   

**A:**  The abbot lived in the labrang, so we didn't have place to stay there and we had to hand over the shag and move to new ones since the new abbot would use it.   

**Q:**  Did you have the other gidru in the shag?   

**A:**  Each gidru lived in his own shag.   

**Q:**  How did you earn your livelihood at this time?   

**A:**  In the past, there was no problem because there were quite a lot of people giving gye/phog. No problem at all. In those days I was just alone so even if I only had a little tsamba, it didn't bother me because I will get tsampa on the next day and the day after. I didn't need to worry. Now if I have to worry of being short of tsamba, I have to worry about ones kids, wife and so forth it is much harder. I was alone, so I only had to worry about the each day as it came.   

**Q:**  What did you do when you were in the monastery in the day time?   

**A:**  I was a long-horn [Tib. དུང་ཆེན] player. Since I wasn't a pechawa, I had to do a horn blower. Later I became a long horn gegen. They gave me 13 young monks to train. We would go to a place just outside of Drepung under the huge boulder taking our beddings there and would study the long horn there for about 1-2 months. We had to sleep under that boulder during the several months of training. Then after teaching the horn, tratsang abbot, umdze and chabu would be invited to test the trainees. A tent would be pitched up and they would test us. The trainees would have to take the test by blowing the horn accordance with the drum beating and the cymbal and also along with the words in the prayers.   

**Q:**  How old were you at that time?   

**A:**  I was about 15-16. It was after the abbot died, and during the time I did the chandeba.   

**Q:**  Playing the long horn must have been very hard? I also heard that your teeth would also go off.   

**A:**  Yes it was. One had to practice blowing with great force and strength in ones lips. You have to make your upper lip hard. They do this by stuffing the end of the horn with a rolled up monk's shawl and then you close your eyes and blow as hard as you can [into the closed horn]. Then at the height of blowing, someone pulls the plug out and the suction pulls off a piece of your upper lip the same size as the air-slit of the horn mouthpiece and one becomes hare lips. This is then soaked with hot, boiling thuka for some days and it hardens. That is how we do it. Once the lips become hard they never get soft again. My upper lip is hare lips still like this-it never healed and went back to normal. Learning to play the gyaling [Tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] instrument was also very difficult.   

**Q:**  TT. When we gadrukpa play the gyaling, we didn't need to blow the way called damgyag] [Tib. ?], but you had to do that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was the circulation of air [Tib. ཕུ་སྐོར] we practiced when blowing. The inhaling of air was done through the nose while the exhaling was done through the mouth at the same time. One has to play the gyaling keeping it horizontal. They teach this by putting thorns under your armpits so that if they begin to drop their elbows, they get stuck by the thorns. A weight, usually a small bag of tsamba which we usually take to the tsog [Tib. ཚོགས་ཁུག], was placed at the other end of the gyaling to strengthen you to be able to keep the gyaling horizontaly. Thus, the trainee was told to practice walking around from the place called Jirisur [Tib. spyi ri zur ?] for a long distances like that with the thorn under their arms blowing until they reached the place where the cow dung seller called Ochorama [Tib. ཨོ་ཇོ་ར་མ] comes driving yaks with cow dung loads and sell the cow dung in small bags and this cow dung was known to be very blessed and sacred [Tib. བྱིན་རླབས་ཆེན་པོ] because it was said that at the time of Tsongkhapa [Tib. ཙོང་ཁ་པ], a piece of cow gung could boil a kettle of tea. Now this place is where they park vehicles. Since I didn't know pecha, this was the only I had to go. The long horn and the gyaling players have to learn kind of notes of the music [Tib. རོལ་ཚིག] which was written in the printing script, ujen [Tib. དབུ་ཅན]. Se we had to learn ujen well even we were lagyüba. I still have all the notes which I have handed over to the Deyang horn players. In Deyang, on the 5th, there were 5 traja where they recite the prayers to propitiate the protectve deities, gangso [Tib. བསྐངས་གསོ]. This is a real test for the long horn and gyaling blowers, since the whole assembly was mainly blowing these instruments which had to be kept in strict time with the drums and cymbals and prayer words as they were lead by the umdze. The musicians had to be good at the prayers also to do this well, although they were poor with religious studies like debating.   

**Q:**  How long did you have to study to learn?   

**A:**  About two months. It started after Tshongjö, when the days are a bit longer.   

**Q:**  Did you get extra gye/phog for this?   

**A:**  No. This was a tax or obligation of the lagyüba which was called shöndre or shamthotre [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབས་ཁྲལ].   

**Q:**  What other kinds of shöndre were there?   

**A:**  Aside from this, there was not much shöndre. If there was construction work to do in the tratsang, then we young monks were sent and also when they renovate Tsuglagang.   

**Q:**  If you go to build house, would you get food?   

**A:**  We got food but not wages.   

**Q:**  What about sweeping and serving tea?   

**A:**  The sweeping was done by the sweepers [Tib. གད་པ]. The ones who served tea were thabyog, not monks.   

**Q:**  If the monks went for building houses in the monastery as shöndre, was food given?   

**A:**  Yes, but no other wages.   

**Q:**  Were you a dobdo when you were young?   

**A:**  Yes, I was a dobdo. When I was geyog, I was nicknamed "big eyes" [Tib. མིག་ཆེན] and I was feared. [laughter] At Mönlam the monks from Sera were the worst behaved. They would spit, or jeer or fight, but I used to keep them under control. They didn't even dare to utter a word, When people said migchen was coming the Sera monks became afraid and keep quiet during Mönlam. At the Mönlam, all the places like the courtyard [Tib. འཁྱམ་ར] and Dawog [Tib. མདའ་འོག] were packed with monks. I was assigned to the worst [most unruly] place in the Mönlam known as Sera Dabla, this was the worst place of any. It was where the Sera dobdo sat and it was wild and unruly, but I didn't problem because it seems that I was destined to tame them [Tib. འདུལ་སྐལ]. For about 1 year after the revolt I stayed in the monastery, then my mother said, there is no point staying there so come back home I need help. I took all my things and returned here to Thambag. We were badly off and were short of tsamba. She had to exchange all the things at home with tsampa like chupa made from woolen cloth [Tib. སྤུ་ཕྲུག] was exchanged for a khe of tsamba because she didn't have tsampa to eat and had nothing left.   

**Q:**  When you were the geyog when did the revolt take place?   

**A:**  In my second year, I wasn't able to do the Tshongjö because of the revolt.   

**Q:**  If the revolt hadn't took place, would you have stayed as geyog?   

**A:**  Sure.   

**Q:**  Is the geyog work only at Mönlam and Tshongjö?   

**A:**  Yes, only then. The rest of the time you are a regular "common" monk [Tib. གྲྭ་དམངས].   

**Q:**  And during Mönlam and Tshongjö time what did you do from morning until evening?   

**A:**  It was to enforce discipline to the monks in the assembly. Particularly to prevent and stop fighting and doing bad things. We each had our own spots to look after. There were 19 geyog and 1 shanggo shingnyer [Tib. ཞང་གོ་ཤིང་གཉེར]. All were posted at different sites in Mönlam.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was the shanggo shingnyer nicknamed, "Crow" [Tib. ཕོ་རོག་ལགས], right?   

**Q:**  When I was the geyog, Crow was not there. The shanggo shingnyer at the time was the pockmarked and bearded called Dragpai Barstag [Tib. གྲགས་པའི་སྦར་ཚག]   

**Q:**  Is he still alive in Drepung?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Well, what do you do in the morning as a geyog?   

**A:**  In the morning, first thing that happened was the Ragyaba [Tib. རགས་རྒྱབ་པ], the untouchable caste of people who carry the bodies of the beggars to the skyburial would give us the signal to wake us up [Tib. ལངས་བརྡ]. The Ragyabba are the ones that make the fire in the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  How do they give the signal?   

**A:**  They knock on the door of our geyog office, geyog gang [Tib. སྒང]. Then the shango shingnyer checks his watch to see if it is time for the Tshogchen chuke [Tib. ཆུ་སྐད] which is a call for tsog starting. After this, the monks entered the assembly hall for the morning tsog [Tib. ཞོགས་ཚོགས] at the Jokhang and the geyog maintained order, each of us in our spots like 2 geyog at the gate of the khyamra and 2 geyog at the north gate as the monks entered the tsog to see that the monks file in and sit down without shoving and pushing. Each monk has his own seating space and were not allowed to sit on their own wish. When all were seated, then the tshogchen shengo was invited to the assembly hall. We have to go to the shengo room and participate in the shengo entrance procession. The geyog do this. We go to get them [shengo] and then accompany them in. As soon as the shengo are in and seated upstairs, then the tea is served by the tea servers, Olo immediately. It was as if the shengo bring them in. The main person in charge of whether the tea and butter is okay or not is the shanggo shingnyer. He does this together with the representative, the tsidrung body guard of the Dalai Lama, simgag [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག] and the representative of Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར] who were responsible for how much ingredients to put into the tea. There are also 2 ja ma.   

**Q:**  Who was Tashi Khangsar?   

**A:**  He was the government's representative.   

**Q:**  Do you know who was the Tashi Khangsar then?   

**A:**  His house was in Thambag which is toppled.   

**Q:**  Tashi Khangsar was not belonged to Drepung, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was set up by the government and he was a tsidrung [wrong, he comes from Namgyal [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] Tratsang and there was one called Drönyerla [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ལགས] who died. His family is called Shagshö [Tib. ཤག་ཤོད] in Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག] and the children are still there. After the entrance of the tshogchen shengo, then the first, the second and third stages of tea were served in order and we geyog stayed at our own posts. Sometimes, when we have some lama sponsors, we go to accompany them also clearing the way for them and leading them to their seats. The lamas would give us a present/tip for this.   

**Q:**  Does the geyog have the power to decide legal cases [pass sentences] [Tib. ཁྲིམས་ཐག་གཅོད]?   

**A:**  No he does not. That is the authority of the shengo. But if there is a fight where we are, then we have the power to beat them. We have the right to beat people. If we kill someone through beating we pay only 1 chegye [Tib. ཕྱེད་བརྒྱད] which is 7 and the half karma or three khagang.   

**Q:**  Has this ever happened?   

**A:**  Such a thing never happened. No. We each carry a big stick/pole that we use to hit the monks, the end of which is white [peeled off]. If you hit a monk with the white part, that is nothing [since that is thinner in diameter]. But if you turn it around and hit them with the other [thick] side, this is considered illegal and we have to pay 1 karma as the fine for hitting with the wrong side. The reason for this is that the pealed off part was the top of the pole hence lighter and thinner and the unpealed part was the bottom of the pole and was thicker and heavier and the beating would cause deadly consequences.   

**Q:**  Who makes the stick?   

**A:**  We have to make it by ourselves.   

**Q:**  It comes from the Mönlam firewood?   

**A:**  No, we were not allowd to do that. We have to go and steal it from someone's tree orchard or cut it off from nearby orchard and we peel them ourselves. Sometimes, we ask the owners to give us poles free.   

**Q:**  There is a difference in the diameter of the poles the geyog carry, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The new ones carry the thickest poles, maybe 1.5-2 inches in diameter, while the elder geyog carry thinner ones. But both were thick enough. If the Mönlam starts on the 3rd, then we have to depart on the 2nd since we first have to go to the Potala for an audience with the Dalai Lama. We have to hand over our vows to the Dalai Lama. During the Mönlam, we geyog have no vows during Mönlam. What we dressed during the Mönlam, was the dress of a monk who lost is celibacy [Tib. སྦར་གོག་གི་ཆས]: 1. The edge of the lower garment [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] was sewn differently from normal monks 2. The water container, chablu [Tib. ཆབ་བླུག] had a dog nose design [Tib. ཁྱི་སྣ] made of leather and it was not worn in the front as normal but at the side. 3. The shawals didn't have a usual red patch at the end, but instead had a black patch. 4. We wore swords, which was forbidden for normal monks. We usually wore huge swords. These swords we borrowed from big labrang and khamba traders. The lamas who lent you swords you would clear the way for them in Mönlam. These borrowed swords were studded with huge corals and turquoise. The handles were carved with gold and silver.   

**Q:**  If something comes up during Mönlam and Tshongjö like a fight, e.g., can you settle it right there or do you have to discuss it with the shanggo shingnyer in the evening?   

**A:**  We settle it right there, in cases where someone was doing something wrong in front of us.   

**Q:**  During your 2 years as geyog, did you experience personally a case of monks misbehaving leading to a beating?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Please tell us.   

**A:**  I was in Dayabwok [Tib. མདའ་གཡབ་འོག] [the wild and raucus place]. This place was usually where the monks who refused to obey laws sat. I was seated in the stage with my pole while they were serving thukpa. The Olo were serving thukpa at the upper part and the lower past was yet to be served. The monks were supposed to be seated. Then 2 Sera dobdo got up and came walking towards me. They looked fierce and carried faulse keys hanging from their waist. They came straight toward me. I was afraid, but it would not be okay if I didn't beat them and if I beat them and they attacked me I would lose my face among the monks. This would have been disgraceful.   

**Q:**  Which tratsang do the two dobdo belonged to?   

**A:**  They were from Sera. I thought that something wrong is going to happened and I stood there by erecting my stick on the floor. Then they came near by me. So I got up and hit the first one on the back side of his neck with my stick and knocked him right off his feet. Then I hit the second one on the back side of his neck and knocked him over too. Both fell to the ground. Then I took off my shawal and left it with a monk and I hit and poked with the stick on all their joints with the stick until they weren't moving around. If they moved, I was ready to use my sword. But they were not moving and they had to be carried out on a kind of stretcher made from monks shawl.   

**Q:**  They couldn't stand up, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There was no risk since at most for killing it was only 1 chegye.   

**A:**  Right. And then at the time when all got up in line to get the alms then someone came to get their alms share.   

**Q:**  Did you know them?   

**A:**  I didn't know them. But they were from Sera.   

**Q:**  Was this in the first or second year?   

**A:**  This was in my first year. I didn't have to pay any fine for beating them. When the Mönlam and Tsongjö were over, one day I went to Sera for the pilgrimage putting my regular sword into the back side of my vest and I met the two of them there. This time, they shook my hands and invited me to their shag and they served me tea and the rice gruel and we enjoyed eating together and became good friends. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Since then you might have become pretty famous, right?   

**Q:**  Since then nobody provoked me.   

**Q:**  What did you have to do to when you first join the dobdo tobtsang?   

**A:**  When I became a member of dobdo tobtsang, there was no competition where the main game is jump, chogyag [Tib. ཕྱོགས་རྒྱག]. Dobdo tobtsang were primarily formed to have the chogyag where Drepung and Sera would compete. In the former tobtsang, there were the dobdo like Tengye [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས] and Rinchen Könjog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག] and Deyang and Sera Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] did the chogyag in the place called Digthang [Tib. སྡིག་ཐང]. And they beat Sera Ngagba badly where the Deyang won 11 events out of 12 and the Ngagpa won 1 event out of 12 events. This was called Kethagyag [Tib. སྐེ་ཐག་རྒྱག] which means putting rope on the neck. If one party won all the events, then it is called Shapayog [Tib. ཤྭ་ལྤགས་གཡོགས] which means put on deer skin and it is also regarded as a bad omen. Therefore, both those tobtsang were disbanded. We set up the new tobtsang and I joined the new tobtsang and Sera also set up a new tobtsang and then we would have to challenge each other. The Sera Ngagba's gengo was the nicknamed "assembly bowl" Tshophor [Tib. ཚོགས་ཕོར]. Our previous tobtsang gengo was Richen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག] He is still alive.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard that he got attacked because he had been the shidü.   

**A:**  He got attacked because he didn't behave well. He was lucky because except for the revolution, he would have been whipped and expelled from kyidu for doing a terrible job as shidü of Sangphu [Tib. གསང་ཕུ] Deyang Shiga. This was one of our best shiga and he managed things so badly that when the planting season came, there was no seed there to plant and he was also carrying a gun unnecessarily though he was supposed to be a monk. He exhausted all the wealth of the shiga by gambling called bagchen [Tib. སྦག་ཆེན] and playing the game called thubeju and the game where three dices were played in the porcelain cups.   

**Q:**  When you joined the tobtsang, was a recommendation needed?   

**A:**  No. We consulted one another to form the tobtsang. If anybody refused to join, we used to force them. Sometimes we would provoke them by giving them a thrashing to make them join voluntarily. We needed a lot of dobdo. A tobtsang usually consisted of 20-30 members. Some of them would dress like dobdo, but do not dare to join the tobtsang.   

**Q:**  Was there any head?   

**A:**  Yes. There was a gengo. Once the tobtsang was formed, the members began training where the gengo would come together. Early in the morning during the three coldest period each of nine days [Tib. དགུ་འགྲིམ], the jumpers had to go to the big gorge called Tagtsang [Tib. སྟག་ཚང] where a stream of water flow down from a horn drain. The jumpers stood naked under the cold water and let it run on their chest from this horn drain. The two temples were also placed under the stream of water and the joints behind the knee and arms also. When all this was finished, we started throwing stones from the boulder. This treatment was to break ones nerves on the surface of skin.   

**Q:**  Did you hold the stones in your hands or just in your fingers?   

**A:**  We hold it this way, the double stones, mendo were thrown with three fingers. The single stone, kyangdo [Tib. རྐྱང་རྡོ] and double stone, mendo were thrown with three fingers also.   

**Q:**  Was the stone so big?   

**A:**  Yes, but thicker and square in shape. The kyangdo stones were thrown with the body bent down.   

**Q:**  How much does the stone weigh?   

**A:**  It weighed about 2 gyama. And there were also different sizes.   

**Q:**  How many events were there for throwing stones?   

**A:**  There was a pair of single stones, kyangdo, pair of double stones, mendo, a pair of bottom stones, kubdo [Tib. རྐུབ་རྡོ] which is thrown from under the bottom. A pair of back stones, gyabdo [Tib. རྒྱབ་རྡོ] which is a back throw done with your back facing the jumping pit. Your body made a sommersault as you throw the stone. When the sommersault was completed, you have to end up standing erect in the jump pit. The training included 12 male sport events [Tib. ཕོ་རྩལ་སྣེ་ཁ་བཅུ་གཉིས] including both the jump and throwing. There were 4 throwing stones, a pair of single stones, kyangdo, a pair of double stones, mendo, a pair of bottom stones, kubdo and a pair of back stones, gyabdo. There were also 4 jumping events, but these were all the same style. The pit was as high as a single story house.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard that the pit at Sera is still in existence.   

**A:**  This is higher than the one at Sera. The pit in Drepung was located at a gorge called "Namthang kug [Tib. གནམ་ཐང་ཁུག྄] where there is a white stupa. This is the same place where the tsogchen umdze and tsogchen shengo trained their voices and there is a water spring called Chumigbug [Tib. ཆུ་མིག་སྦུག]. The umdze would drink water to be full from this spring and lay down on the boulder face down and then he would vomit out the water and then pratcice the umdze voice.   

**Q:**  Was there a good sunshine there?   

**A:**  Yes. The shengo would also practice his voice because he had to give the assembly speech [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ].   

**Q:**  Was the abbot alive when you joined the tobtsang?   

**A:**  No, he was dead earlier, otherwise he wouldn't have allowed me to do this and even if I didn't learn pecha, I would have to wear the lower garment longer [like the pechawa].   

**Q:**  Just before the revolt, the dobdo tobtsang was eliminated, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did they eliminate it? I heard that it was done by the Gyerong [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] abbot. Was it true? Did the tratsang eliminate it or the laji?   

**A:**  The laji eliminated it.   

**Q:**  Was there important cause like fighting etc?   

**A:**  There wasn't any big trouble, but it was about to have a fight. So it was eliminated to prevent the fight.   

**Q:**  I heard that Deyang and Ngagpa did the chogyag and then they fought, wasn't it?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. When we lost contest against Sera Ngagba, we challenged for another chogyag, but they told us the tobtsang is getting disbanded, so they will not do the chogyag. We also disbanded the tobtsang and gave our things to the tratsang, sold some and offered the money as alms to the monks and we also offered a copper water container on which the names of the donators were engraved.   

**Q:**  When was this, one-year or half a year before the revolt?   

**A:**  About a year, then the revolt started.   

**Q:**  Did the Yigtsang meddle into this matter?   

**A:**  No it was done by the Drepung Laji alone.   

**Q:**  During the Tashi Chogyag, [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱག] did fighting take place?   

**A:**  No this was a friendly contest-no winners or losers.   

**Q:**  There was no fight in this, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There would be fighting when they challenge and compete, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Have you ever taken part in any of these competitions?   

**A:**  We challenged Sera Ngagba for another match but they refused.   

**Q:**  Where did the money to buy tobtsang possessions come from?   

**A:**  Partly it was collected from the members and partly from the sponsors. Our sponsor was the gambler nicknamed "ghoast khushu" Drekhushu [Tib. འདྲེ་ཁུ་ཤུག [laughter].   

**A:**  TT. He was the famouse one wearing a golden ear ring, living in the Barkor Street.   

**A:**  We would invite him when there were important events going on. He would come riding a red horse with silver rein and the straps going under the tail. And the dobdo would go to the recieve him in the stone floor. He would smoke and wear a pair of spectacles. He was a great person and used to be a Deyang monk and he likes the dobdo. There were other sponsors too such as kudrak of the dewashung. They gave everything the tobtsang needed. Originally, when the Deyang did the chogyag, Chöndzin la [Tib. ཆོས་འཛིན་ལགས] from Thamba Simkhang [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང] was a key sponsor for our tobtsang. He was the chief, margenba [Tib. མ་རྒན་པ] when they won and put the neck rope on Sera Ngagba in the chogyag.   

**Q:**  TT. Chöndzin la is now with the Dalai Lama. When the gambler Drekhushu was your sponsor would he give you everything you need?   

**A:**  Yes, he would and he would ask us what difficulties we have. If we tell them that we didn't have enough to spend he would help.   

**Q:**  Was he rich then?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, we also had sponsors in Lhasa like kudrak and Thambag Simkhang was also our sponsor.   

**Q:**  Are there still some family members of Drekhushu?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**A:**  He lived in the three storied building near the long prayer pole Ganden Thangnyöl [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཐང་སྙོལ], [in the Barkor] right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the fighting and contest when serving rice gruel thukpa?   

**A:**  This was a terrible contest to get the first place among the thukpa servers. To get hit on the head with a ladle and bleeding was a common occurrence.   

**Q:**  The fight was between the Amdo and the böba, right?   

**A:**  The fight was worse in Gomang though there were fightings in Loseling and the Deyang also. In Gomang, there were Amdo, Mongolians and böba. So they had loyalty to one's ethnic group and fought when competing to get the first place and even would also kill each other. When the servers lined up one after another, usually they never slowed up from running in from the kitchen at full speed carrying their buckets of thugba in front taking a little amount of thukpa in in the bucket. * At the cauldrons where the thukpa was made, thabyog stood on four sides to try to control the ladeling of the thukba. But none of the runners paid attention to that and in the end the thabyog completly lost control of the process. The chabril would beat the thukpa servers hard but to no avail because ethnic groups like böba, Amdo, Mongolian and the monks in the Gungru [khamtsen] would ganging up in the contest.   

**Q:**  When they were going in line to serve the thukpa, they would push each other with their shoulders, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Each runner banged into the one ahead of him in the queue at full speed and the thukba would splash high into the air with the sound "shag shag" and the thukpa would splash on the religious decorations. The pushing and bumping among the servers became intense and more thukba was spilled and waisted than eaten when they push each othere and fall down.   

**Q:**  Is it that there were more dobdo in Gomang?   

**A:**  No, its that there were monks from different region with different ethnic loyalties. In Deyang there is not the fighting to be first and no fighting in the front row, but there was otherwise lot of pushing. However, the pushing and bumping was not done in front of the places where the abbot, the gegö and the umdze were seated. They would push when they came to the east and the west sides. And they would even pour the thukpa from the container into their bowl which is placed on the cloak, but nobody would say anything. They are in such a hurry that they scoop out their own thukba and take just a little bit in the sola and run to get the first place.   

**Q:**  Was the post of chandeba one you had to request?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you get the idea for this and who did you ask?   

**A:**  The authority for appointing chandeba rested in the hands of the Deyang Nyertsang. Only Deyang can be chandeba. People liked this job because you got a double share in the Mönlam where the alms were big amount. To get the post of chandeba, you only had to give a trangga garbo and a khata to the Deyang Nyertsang. But to ask the shengo for the post of geyog was really difficult. First when the new shengo was appointed, the dobdo who were looking for the post would give khata as congratulations for his appointment. This was simply to get some direct contact with the shengo. When the actual asking for the post came, we had to find people to do the good office to the sheyngo on our behalf to ask for the job.   

**Q:**  Was it hard to get this job?   

**A:**  It was very hard. There were so many dobdo in Drepung, but only 19 geyog would be appointed.   

**Q:**  How many dobdo would ask for geyog?   

**Q:**  There would be at least 30-40 dobdo who would bring their backers stronger than one another.   

**Q:**  One reason for asking for geyog might be for the fame and the income was good, right??   

**A:**  Yes. Among the dobdo, the post of geyog was regarded like a model [Tib. མིག་དཔེ] among the dobdo and if a dobdo did not become a geyog, the name "geyog" would seem meaningless. Also later on, an ex-geyog was treated with respect. In mordern times, the geyog is like the Public Security [Ch. gong an] personal. [laughter]   

**Q:**  When you lived separately, did you attend the tsog where there was mangja and tea in the khamtsen, tsomja [Tib. ཚོམས་ཇ] after becoming a teacher of 3 students learning the big horn [Tib. དུང་ཆེན] and living separately?   

**A:**  Only when there were alms. [laughter]   

**Q:**  What about traja?   

**A:**  If there was alms I go, if not I don't.   

**Q:**  While you were a dobdo did you go out as a hired-servant for the kudrak or doing tailoring and harvesting etc?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did your family have to bring you tsamba?   

**A:**  No. We received 4 khe of barley and 2 khe of peas of the best quality from our tratsang in one year. Besides, another 3 junbo [Tib. བཅུ་འབོ] which is equal to one and half khe of grain were given to each monk by the Jiso. In addition, at tshog rice gruel thukpa, rice mixed with melted butter, dresi [Tib. འབྲས་སིལ] and the sweet potatoes mixed with melted butter, droma markhu [Tib. གྲོམ་མ་མར་ཁུ] and tea were always served. So we had an abundance of food. We couldn't finish eating, in fact.   

**Q:**  When they gave these, you would go, right?   

**A:**  Yes, if not, I don't go. [laughter]   

**Q:**  If you didn't go to tshog what did you do the shag?   

**A:**  I would just fool around [Tib. ཕར་ཤང་ཐབ྄] in the gorge outside the circumambulation road. If the pattrol comes, they would catch us. And we would also carry horn and gyaling and pratcice them.   

**Q:**  Would you play cards?   

**A:**  Sometimes, we would play dice and bagchen.   

**Q:**  Did you have to do any other shöndre like khamtsen gegen other than playing the big horn?   

**A:**  The turn to become the Deyang gegö would come according to the time of giving the tonggo. When the turn comes, the gegö had to give 6 traja.   

**Q:**  Did your turn come for becoming a gegö?   

**A:**  When my turn was about to come, the revolt took place. If the revolt hadn't come, I was in line to become Deyang gegö.   

**Q:**  Did you have to be the khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  Deyang had no khamtsen, so no gegen. We would be attached to Hamdong and Samlo Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Where did the money come from for serving 6 traja if your turn comes?   

**A:**  We had to go look for sponsors.   

