# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0433.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Tibetan Autonomous Region, Tibetan Autonomous Region/China  
**Date of Interview:** 1998  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Ben Jiao  
**Name:** Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee was a miser of the Lhalu aristocratic family who became an estate manager for Lhalu. In this interview, he discusses in detail how the PLA arrived in Kham, how Lhalu returned from Chamdo, and how Ngabö came. From 1957-1959, he managed the North Yagde estate located in Nyemo and discusses a law case he was involved in that was filed in the Judicial Office [Tib. gyod zhib las khuns] between himself and Lhalu's chandzö (manager) regarding the interest on a loan from Lhalu's estate.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0433_04/H_0433_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  The Khambas told the Chandzö of Lhalu, "You shouldn't stay there. You should run away. Otherwise, you will be arrested." When I went there, the letter from the [Chinese] government had reached Derge Gönchen [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་མགོན་ཆེན] Monastery. Before that, we used to impose taxes on the Chinese territory [Tib. རྒྱ་སྡེ], but at that time, they didn't pay taxes. Usually, I knew them. So they told me, "Usually, you would treat us nicely when we were doing trading, so we will you see you off nicely. You should not stay here." And they sent me all the horse corvée and the animal corvée I needed. They said, "The letter [from the Chinese government] has arrived." They were using sewing machines and making new flags with the five stars. They said, "From the 22nd we have stopped working for the taxes for the Tibetan local government. We are told that we are not allowed to work for the taxes for the Tibetan local government." The red flag was already erected in that place.   

**Q:**  Did you have to cross the river in coracles?   

**A:**  Yes. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> told me that he would conclude his work.   

**Q:**  What did the Tibetan soldiers say?   

**A:**  They were just not attentive at all.   

**Q:**  Weren't they worried about the situation?   

**A:**  No, even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> was not attentive. The gyagpön recognized me because he said that he had been working as a servant for my uncle when I was going to school. So he helped me, and served me food and said, "You should go back. I will conclude the work." Then I handed over the work and I went back in the fourth month. When I got back [to Chamdo] I was told to go to Lhasa on the next day. They had already sent the things ahead. At that time, the disturbance had started to occur a little bit. Rupön Bükhangwa also arrived at Chamdo and he said that he was going to Denma Chöngor [Tib. ལྡན་མ་ཆོས་འཁོར] Monastery.   

**Q:**  In 1951, Lhalu was in Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were two Muslims working on the wireless machine [of the Tibetan government]. They said that the Chinese had arrived there and Rupön Bükhangwa had left from Chamdo aggressively. They didn't trust the soldiers when they sent things along with them so I was sent with the soldiers. When I arrived at Khyungpo, I heard that Rupön Bükhangwa had been lost in the battle. After that, I arrived at Lhasa with the goods and then I stayed in Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Did you meet Ngabö on the way from Chamdo?   

**A:**  No, I didn't meet him, but I met his wife at the mountain pass called Shargongla [Tib. ཤར་གོང་ལ].   

**Q:**  Was she going back?   

**A:**  She was going down to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Where was Ngabö at that time?   

**A:**  When I went to Kham the first time and came back, I heard that Lhalu was leaving Kham and I was sent to receive him. At that time, I met Ngabö's wife on the mountain pass Shargongla, or the Nubgongla [Tib. ནུབ་གོང་ལ].   

**Q:**  Was that in 1951? It should be 1950, right?   

**A:**  It was in 1950. I met him on the way when he was coming to Kham and I was coming from Kham. After that, when I went to receive Lhalu, I met Lhalu at Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ]. I arrived at Shopando in the morning and he arrived there in the evening. There were a few disturbances already taking place. The late Depön Phulungwa [Tib. ཕུ་ལུང་བ] was there. He probably ran away from down there. I heard that the Chinese attacked them at night. He visited Lhalu and told him something while crying. On that night, at around 12 p.m., I was sent to Lhasa, again because they thought that the things [good, taxes] would get lost [stolen]. So I had to depart at night. On that night, there was kind of a disturbance as the monks of the Shopando Monastery were also running away carrying their bowls and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> bags and wearing their gowns [monk's robes]. Actually, there wasn't any place to run away to, but they were scared and running away, loading their yaks with their belongings.   

**Q:**  What was the name of that place?   

**A:**  It was called Shopando.   

**Q:**  How long did it take you to get to Lhasa from Chamdo?   

**A:**  It took quite a long time and then I stayed in Lhasa. I heard that Lhalu's wife was coming up ahead and I was told to go to receive her at the place called Gutsha [Tib. རྒུ་ཚ] near the Lhadong Shenka [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ] ferry site. When I got there, she had already arrived. Then in 1951, when I was 25 years old, I asked for leave from the estate manager's job in Kongpo and I stayed in Lhasa. My home was in Nyemo. I stayed in a house behind the Tsögo family's House [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ].   

**Q:**  After that, what work did you do?   

**A:**  In Kongpo, the herds of animals and the barley were still left there, but I cleared all the accounts of the estate. Then I went back to Nyemo.   

**Q:**  Who was there in Nyemo at your home?   

**A:**  My home was in Nyemo Yagde [Tib. གཡག་སྡེ] and just near to my house there was an estate that belonged to Lhalu. I was in charge of selling the barley stored in the storerooms for Lhalu. I worked on that for 3 years. There were about 10,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley there. I lent loans and I also sold barley. Lhalu bought Phagpalha's [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] house for 30,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>. For 1,000 dotse, Lhalu gave an estate called Yamda Dekyi Khagsar [Tib. ཡབ་མདའ་བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཁང་གསར] and they paid 20,000 cash to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> who sold the house. The nendrön said he was related to me, so he sold the house to Lhalu and handed it over to me. Otherwise, he wouldn't have sold the house.   

**Q:**  Which house that?   

**A:**  That was Phagpalha's house located near Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང].   

**Q:**  Did Lhalu buy the house or did you buy it?   

**A:**  Lhalu bought the house and I went to pay the money. Near to my house, there was an estate of Lhalu which had been granted when Lhalu was the family of the 8th Dalai Lama. Before that, it belonged to the Tibetan Government and they used to send a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and lay official as the estate managers. After the estate belonged to Lhalu, they sent two servants as the estate managers. Actually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> of Lhalu should have managed the estate, but since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> had to stay in Lhasa, they just sent some of their relatives as the acting estate manager. I remember when I was about 7 years old, my father had also managed that estate for 3 years but they didn't get along well. In the meantime, some other gyagpön managed the estate. When I got there, the two Chandzö, Jigme [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད] and Kelsang Wangdü [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དབང་འདུས], were managing the estate. After their term was over, the estate was handed over to the new chandzö named Tengpa [Tib. སྟེང་པ]. He leased the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilingka</a> for 300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley per year. After managing the shiga for 3 years, the estate manager had a lawsuit with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and the miser made an appeal to the Dalai Lama in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> saying that the estate manager had charged interest on the interest owed [Tib. སྐྱེད་ལ་སྐྱེད་རྒྱག]. Normally, the miser had to pay interest for the loan. If there would be interest not paid, they should not be charge for the interest not paid. But the estate manager added the interest deficit on to the principal and charged interest for the interest. After that, the government sent an edict and all of us were called to Lhasa. I was also involved because we also had managed the estate in the past. So all of us were called to Lhasa to the Judicial Office[Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས]. At that time, my father was in Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ] managing Lhalu's estate called Jangyab [Tib. ལྕང་རྒྱབ]. When my father managed the estate, I was only 7 years old and I didn't know anything about the estate, so I sent letters to him and asked about the lawsuit, but he didn't take any notice about the lawsuit. The daughter-in-law of Chandzö Jigme was my sister. Before that, they didn't get along well with my father. But at that time, they got along well and my father didn't take notice of it. So the Judicial Office cornered me and the lawsuit came on my head. It took six months to settle the lawsuit.   

**Q:**  How did you file the lawsuit?   

**A:**  I had one problem that I was accused of. When I sold the barley for four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> per <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a>, they accused me, saying that the price that was charged too high.   

**Q:**  To whom did you sell the barley?   

**A:**  I sold it to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. They bought all the barley. Lhalu needed the money to pay for the house that he bought and the house seller was pursuing the money because the payment arrangement was made in the 10th month. The main lawsuit was regarding the loan interest charged by the estate. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> was standing on one side and my father was also standing on their side. They told me, "When we thoroughly investigated the lawsuit like the proverb, "Blowing air into the intestine" [Tib. རྒྱུ་མ་ཕུ་འདེད], we found the root of the lawsuit, namely, that the estate becomes yours because you were the estate manager at the beginning." And they blamed me for being the root of the lawsuit. I didn't accept that and I said, "You can't do like the proverb, "Blowing the intestine" on this matter. I also stayed in Kongpo for 10 years on an estate. Whenever there were loan deficits, I would take an agreement regarding the loan deficit for every year. You also managed the estate for so many years. So you should have that kind of loan agreement. If we check the agreements, we will know who had left the loan deficits." Furthermore, when my father managed the estate for three years, he didn't get along well with the miser and all of the documents were sealed and left there. My father ganged up with the Chandzö Jigme who was the opponent of the lawsuit and said that they didn't have any agreement. Jigme's son was in Lhoka. So he said "If I don't call my son, I don't know about this." He was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and I was just an ordinary person. After that, Lhalu called us to him and investigated the matter. The gyagpön was sitting on the cushion and we sat on the carpet. The gyagpön was scolding me a lot saying, "You are talking in a manner as if you are eloquent. Actually, you are the main chandzö with your father. If you don't know about this, how could your son know?" I said, "Actually, you gyagpön were duping the miser. Actually, you don't know anything. You don't know even the 13 codes of laws. You probably never read that. I went to Kongpo and went to the border of Tibet and China. I have been involved in many troubles and law cases, so you listen! Kay [a term used when scolding people] I am well experienced. So I will not yield to you." Jigme said, "You are spoiled [ Tib. skyag lang shor]." And he stood up and came to beat me up. Then I grabbed his chest adn then Lhalu said, "Don't do that." I said, "We are equal." Then Chandzö Jigme said, "You called me Kay." I said, "You are male, so I called you Kay. Do I have to call you May []?" Lhalu burst into laughter. I told him, "You are a Chandzö and our grandfather was also a Chandzö. But he was not like you, a disgraceful person [Tib. ཞབས་འདྲེན་པ]. What do you expect from bullying the miser? Who made Lhalu fall into loans? You people caused this trouble and Lhalu became like a beggar with several thousands <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> of loan debts. Look! What is in the storeroom? Bring me the income books of the estate and then I will check the income and the expenditures. When we were on the estate, how many times did you pursue us for income? Bring me the documents. I will calculate it." He said, "We don't have documents. What do you mean by the proverb, 'Blowing air into the intestine'?" I said, "It is easy to say that verbally. Actually, it means if you put water into the intestine, the sheep droppings would fall out at the end of the intestine. If you don't know how to do that, I will do that for you." We argued in front of Lhalu and we also went to the Judicial Office for six months.   

**Q:**  Where was that located?   

**A:**  It was located in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and the windows were facing toward to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. The Chief Directors [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པ] were Yuthok and Rasagyagen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན] [Note: Actually, Rasagyagen was one of the 4th rank officials in charge [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ] and the Chief Director was Yuthok. Altogether there were eight lay and monk officials].   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  It was in 1956. They didn't decide the case at all and one day Lhalu told me, "You are talking back to me." He was angry with me for seven days and didn't talk to me. Actually, I was an estate manager, not a servant. Normally, I would just go to see him in the morning for a short time. I have never worked as a servant. I told Lhalu, "This is not my business. They are going to confiscate your estate." At that point, Lhalu was scared very much. I said, "I don't actually need to argue for the common law case. But they falsely accused me. So I have no choice but to come out and get involved. Instead of saying thank you to me, you are treating me like this. If you, Lhalu don't want the estate, I want the estate." Actually, Lhalu was not to be blamed. Those people [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a>] did that. However, the lawsuit was still not decided and we had to go to the Tsikhang. On that day, I also argued a lot with them and they didn't have much to say because justice was on my side. Then the Tsipön said, "Now, you gyagpön should respond to him." When the Tsipön suppressed them when they said something, their bodies were shaking.   

**Q:**  Who was there in the Tsikhang?   

**A:**  I forgot the names of the officials. There were quite a lot of Tsipön. The Chief Director of the Judicial Office was Yuthok and Rasagyagan, and in the team for doing the investigation, there was a lay official called Lhünraba [Tib. ལྷུན་རབ་པ]. One day, we were called to the office and all of us bent down at the waist and put our hands on our knees and took off our hats. Lhünraba was scolding us very much and Lhünraba told me, "You are spoiled and talking big. So we are going to whip you." Then two of the sweepers who were wearing yellow caps and long earrings came over holding a black rope. So I was very agitated and I had a lot of pain in the waist. So I stood upright and told the sweeper, "Stop there! You don't need to bring the rope. If I am guilty and am getting whipped, I will accept it. You don't need to tie me up. Before whipping, they have to talk. I also had been an estate manager and I had punished people. If someone was a thief, they would get whipped right away. This was called the "arrival whipping" [Tib. འབྱོར་ལྕག], and then they would be whipped twice when interrogated. Otherwise, we wouldn't whip people without any reason. But I am not a thief. They have to tell me the reason for whipping me. So the two of you go away." I didn't salute them and I also had pain in my waist, so I stood upright and told the officials, "Please tell me the reason for whipping me. If I am guilty, I will accept the whipping. If you say that you are going to whip a person without reason, who would accept that? You are the officials of the Tibetan Government and you have the button on your cap and the tassel for your horse. I am an ordinary person. But I have led the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> from the age fifteen according to the Code of Thirteen Laws. I know all about the laws in there. I had investigated and compared the laws with many dzongs and I know about that. I have never done any lawless things." The two Chief Directors were laughing and they just covered their mouths with their sleeves. So I was not afraid. Then I said, "If you whip me without any reason, I am going to prostrate and appeal to the Dalai Lama in Norbulinga." I said, "Look! How is the situation now? If you government officials work like this how would the [situation] be? Go ahead and tell me the reason for whipping me."   

**Q:**  What did they say?   

**A:**  They didn't say anything. Then I told them about the case and how he [gyagpön] did the wrong things. And how they decided the law unjustly, and how they bullied the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and made Lhalu fall into debt. When I read the officials two points, his [chandzö] face became red. Finally, they said "Today the office is going to close and we should come tomorrow." Later, they didn't decide the case completely and after that, the revolt was almost going to take place.   

**Q:**  In 1956, did they leave the case like this?   

**A:**  Later, they didn't settle the law case completely. After that, Lhalu and the Kashag consulted and they had the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> called Tengpa [Tib. སྟེང་པ] resign because he had caused the trouble. But they allowed the former estate manager Chandzö Jigme to manage the estate as before because he was kind of close to Lhalu. Then I verbally fought with him [Tib. ཇིགམེ] and told him, "When you stayed for so many years, what did you do? What you did was trading and embezzling and squandering. When my father handed over the estate to you, I was seven years old. He had renovated the house and pounded the Arka earth on the roof. But now you have made it into ruins." His house was in Yamda [Tib yab mda']. "Look at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> in Yamda, all of them are beggars. If you are capable, go ahead and make them not become beggars. Are you coming here to rob? If you come here, I will break your legs!" The law case was not settled and I insisted on staying there. So finally, the Judicial Office and the Kashag consulted and told me to manage the estate.   

**Q:**  What estate was that?   

**A:**  It was Yagde [Tib. གཡག་སྡེ] estate. It was located at the upper part of my home. Then I refused to manage the estate because the talk about reforms was almost starting.   

**Q:**  Did they start talking about the reforms in 1957?   

**A:**  It was 1958 and the Preparatory Committee of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> was there. Then Lhalu told me, "If you don't manage the estate, we are going to keep you here as a servant." I said, "If you keep me here as a servant, I will do that. It is happiest for me to stay in Lhasa." Then one day, the Kashag and the Judicial Office said that they had reached a decision and that I should manage the estate privately or you should manage it for Lhalu. Since then, I managed the estate for Lhalu. Later, the lawsuit was left pending like this.   

**Q:**  After that, what did you do?   

**A:**  From 1957-1959 I stayed in the North Yagde estate.   

**Q:**  Was that located in Nyemo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> in Kongpo were quite tough, but it was okay for me. I got along with the miser well. When something went wrong I used to beat them up right away. At the time of the revolt, my worst crime was that I beat people up. The miser were scared of me and I treated the poor people very nicely and suppressed the rich and tough ones.   

**Q:**  Are the three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> still alive?   

**A:**  No, all of them died. One of them was closely related to me. When I fought with the other two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a>, the one who is related to me said, "Don't say that." Then I also told him, "Aren't you going to shut your mouth? Didn't you make me do all the work."   

