# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0433.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , , Tibet Autonomous Region/China  
**Date of Interview:** 1998  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Ben Jiao  
**Name:** Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The subject was a miser who belong to the Lhalu aristocratic family and then became an estate manager for Lhalu. In this interview, he describes how his home and belongings were treated under the government’s redeeming policy. He also talks about how in 1960 he was sentenced to imprisonment for 20 years and worked as a farmer while in prison. Additionally, he discusses how he would write prisoners' information in Tibetan for the cadres and how after his release from prison in 1979, he spent one year in a labor camp.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0433_02/H_0433_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Most of the fields of one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> used 35 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of seed. I made the list of all the fields, people and the animals. I did that over a period of four months and handed the list to the two of them [cadres] and they wrote the list in Chinese. At one time, the [Chinese] military officers sent me again to collect guns and swords.   

**Q:**  All together, they sent you three times, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was sent to collect the swords, but people had only knives this long.   

**Q:**  Did you collect all the knives?   

**A:**  Yes. I was sent from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and after collecting them, I had to hand them over to the military officers. They scolded me saying, "You have collected all the knives that the misers use for cutting meat. Go and return all of these knives." Altogether, there were about 150 knives. After that, they held the study sessions for four months. Among them, two people who were said to have committed serious crimes, were shut up in the prison. I was also almost locked up in the prison, but the soldiers treated me well. There was criticism from the cadres in the county saying I did a lot of things to help the reactionaries. The father of Samding Dorje Phagmo [Tib. བསམ་ལྡིང་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཕག་མོ] was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Thönpa. He was called Kyiru [Tib. སྐྱིད་རུ] Chandzö. The Khambas caused him a lot of harm and he criticized me saying that I made relations with the reactionaries, so the cadres in the county decided to arrest me. Normally, the Chinese male and female cadres used to talk to me when they came up, but on that day they were showing kind of long faces and they didn't talk to me. After that, they held a meeting and arrested two people. After the meeting was over, the two cadres came to me and were smiling at me and said, "The county was going to arrest you with those two because there was criticism against you, but the military officers told them, 'You can't do that. He has committed crimes but he also has made accomplishments. When we compare his crimes with the accomplishments, the accomplishments are bigger. Therefore, you can't arrest him.'"   

**Q:**  You attended the study sessions for four months, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did they do in the study session from the beginning to the end?   

**A:**  The main thing was confess how we punished the misers and whether one had relations with the revolters, and whether one had hidden guns and swords.   

**Q:**  What happened after the study session?   

**A:**  After the study session was over, the military officer called me and said, "We are going to Yadong. What opinion do you have?" I didn't have experience with the revolution so I said, "I don't have any opinion." Then he said, "There is not much to think about. You can't bring back the old days. The reforms will take place and we will implement the redeeming policy. We have given the documents to the Military Control Committee [Tib. དམག་དོན་བཀག་འདོམས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. You should go to your house in Lhasa. We will give you a ride and make the arrangements for everything. You should keep the things you really need and sell the other things. Your home will also have the redeeming policy." Then I went to Lhasa and stayed in the Southern neighborhood area [Tib. ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་ས་ཁུལ]. A Security person came and said the Neighborhood Committee told him to deliver the key to my house to me. In the other rooms, there were only the cushions and the tables. Then I opened the room where I kept my things. I was worried about the guns because I had to hand them over, and I opened the trunks that were full of the serge [woolen cloth] and carpets. There were also trunks full of new clothes. They saw these things and there weren't any guns in those three trunks. They said that the People's Liberation Army had searched for guns and goldware, but they were not there. The soldiers wouldn't take the goldware. They probably [people in the Neighborhood Committee] stole them.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the Southern Neighborhood Committee?   

**A:**  Yes, I had a full leather box like this size where I kept the gold rings and goldenware that had been left as pawn [for loans]. Then I closed the door and said I would do the other things tomorrow. They took the key away from me. "You have to leave the key here," they said. And then I went back. On the next day, they didn't give me the key for three months and I was kind of stopped in Lhasa for six months until the third month of 1960. If I had gone back right away, I wouldn't have been involved in the revolt. After that, I went to the Security Office [Tib. བདེ་འཇགས་ལས་ཁུངས], but they didn't make a move. There were some bad women in the Neighborhood area who were like uyön or tsugdrang. They just stopped me there. In the meantime, without my notice, they transferred my residence card to Rimpung [Tib. རིན་སྤུངས] County. So I had to go to Rimpung. There had called the manager of the estate to the meeting and when they inquired about me, the other manager told them that I had run away. The other exstate manager had also criticized me and said that I had had relations with reactionaries. At the time of reinvestigating of the reforms, they inquired about guns and the old soldiers in Kongpo who had left for Yadong. Then two soldiers of the Security Office came and said, "Bring your certificate. If you don't have the certificate, you should come to the Security Office." I said, "Before that, the soldiers didn't have any suspicion and treated me very nicely and they trusted me and they didn't give me any certificate. So I will come to the Security office." At that time, I had a leg sickness and I was going to the hospital. When I was at the front of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, I saw the Chinese woman from the Security Office. She also saw me and she probably knew that they were going to take me. When I looked at her, she was showing the appearance as if she didn't know me and left. Then I thought they might inquire about me if I went to the hospital, so I returned back to the security office where the soldiers were. Right at that time, they [the soldiers] took me with them and when we got near the gate of the Military Headquarters [Ch. jun qu], the guards asked me, "What did you come for?" I don't know Chinese and they talked in Chinese. And then they told me to go back. I showed the pass to the guards and they let me go in and they [soldiers] argued with each other very seriously. Then I insisted to the guard to let me in to talk with the military officers. When I went in and talked with the military officer, they took me with a truck full of soldiers and on that night, we reached Markyang [Tib. མར་རྐྱང]. On the next day, we reached Rimpung and I was shut in the prison with the prisoners.   

**Q:**  You didn't get the chance to talk, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On that night I didn't have any thoughts and I was left with the prisoners. The other prisoners were locked in cells. At that time, the head [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] was an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ་བ] A person from Amdo.">Amdowa</a> called Yetsela [Tib. ཡེ་ཚེ་ལགས] who is now retired and staying in Karma Künsang [Tib. སྐར་མ་ཀུན་བཟང]. They knew that my history was quite good because the soldiers must have told them. The official said, "You can sleep inside or outside." I said, "It is okay for me to sleep here." I didn't have anything except a towel because we were not allowed take anything in the hospital. In the morning, they just gave me a cup of hot water and we reached Markyang that night. On the next day, they held a meeting where all the prisoners were called and told, "You had criticized this person a lot saying that he was a reactionary." Then they told me to talk at the meeting and I told them about the Khambas coming to the lodging inn and I said, "I did that to protect the people. If I didn't do that, the Khambas would have killed people and taken away all of their things. But you people criticized me." Then I asked them, "Was that correct?" They said, "Yes." Then I told them, "What did you get now? If you had left me alone, I wouldn't have to get imprisoned and I would do everything to help you. I had reported that all of you are not to be blamed, but you people turned against me. So all of us have to stay here and suffer." After that, I was brought to Yagde. There were two new military officers of the Military Control Committee [Tib. དམག་དོན་བཀག་འདོམས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷང་ཁང] there and when I arrived in the courtyard, they called me in. The soldiers from Rimpung talked with them and I was left in a monk's apartment like a prisoner. Then the military officer came down with my wife who was carrying her child. They had been made into beggars and they didn't have food to eat except tes snf some wild plants in a pot. I was not sure whether there were meat or bones in the wild plants. Actually, I had been behaving well and I was not guilty until that time. Then I just smashed the pot right there and said I am not going to eat this. There was an interpreter from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> called Jamyang [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས]. He was a very bad person, but he treated me very well and said, "Your home didn't have anything. I will give you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and meat, whatever you want." And he gave me some tsamba. After that, they interrogated me while the military officer was holding a gun. In the past, the military officers had told me, "Don't talk recklessly in front of the cadres and especially the soldiers who have sacrificed their lives and are working." All different kinds of people were there among the cadres. So I told the interrogator, "Actually, the situation was very tight in Lhasa, but I was allowed to go everywhere in the daytime like in Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]. I was not allowed to stay over night." The cadres told me, "You can hold this certificate. We will help you." When I went to Tölung Nenang [Tib. གནས་ནང], I found that my belongings there had been confiscated during the reforms. They [the cadres] told me, "Your belongings were confiscated. What do you want?" Actually, I didn't want anything, so I came back. He asked me, "What did you do in Lhasa? Did you go to attend the meetings?" I said, "They didn't call me to the meetings. Sometimes I went to the meetings even if they didn't call me." Then he asked me what did they say. "I went to the Security Office to find a job and they told me to go to the Newspaper Office because you know Tibetan writing. A vehicle hit my leg and my leg got injured. They gave me and my wife ration cards and the resident cards, so I am thinking of taking these and going to Lhasa." The soldiers interrogated me harshly and I also was suspicious and also scared. So I also talked badly.   

**Q:**  What did you say?   

**A:**  The soldiers pointed the gun and though they wouldn't shoot me, they were showing a serious look. I thought now they were not going to treat me well. So I said, "Now, I don't trust you. Anyway, I know that I am going to be killed. Until now I had been doing things honestly. The military officer of the People's Liberation Army told me, 'You have been working as a servant until now. Now you belong to us." I also told him, "I have been doing this until now. Now you have seized the power so I will do whatever you tell me to do. It has been only six months. The cadres were changed, but they have confiscated my home, although it was said that they would implement the redeeming policy. The Local Neighborhood Committee has stolen my belongings except for a little amount of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and some rubbish things. We Tibetans have religious faith towards the Dalai Lama and I had the faith until the revolt. Since the revolt, I stopped having faith towards him and did honestly whatever the cadres told me to do. It has been only six months, but you are treating me like this. So I don't trust you and I feel very sad and I think this is a karmic result from my previous life." The officials might have gotten angry for they didn't say anything and sent me to Rimpung. So like this, I was imprisoned for twenty years.   

**Q:**  Was that the county prison?   

**A:**  Yes, I was shut in the county prison for two years from 1960-1962.   

**Q:**  What punishment did they announce?   

**A:**  They didn't punish me and they also didn't announce any prison term.   

**Q:**  Did they make you work?   

**A:**  I was among the prisoners who committed serious crimes and I was locked up all the time with handcuffs and leg shackles. They didn't make me work. Later, I got sick and I was locked in a small cell alone. After three months, they removed the handcuffs and the shackles. In 1962, I was sent to the Gyantse State Farm [Ch. nong chang] where they made me work doing farming.   

**Q:**  What were your family members doing?   

**A:**  My wife and children were at home. They confiscated my belongings and I didn't have any chance to speak. When I inquired about the military officer [who treated me well], I heard that he had gone to Yadong. > In 1962, the policy became slightly better and some prisoners were released. At the beginning, it was said that I also was to be among the prisoners who were going to be released. One day, the Chinese leader named Wangden Tashi [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་བཀྲ་ཤིས], who spoke Tibetan very fluently and now who is in China, summoned me. He didn't need an interpreter, though it was a little bit hard to understand his Tibetan. One day he called me and interrogated me about the person who died after I whipped him. A person named Gyurme Dorje [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ], who was a member of the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་གྲོས] of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a>, criticized me and submitted a report when he was a prisoner in Gyantse Dragü [Tib. བྲག་ཁུད] about the person who died after I whipped him in Yamdrog. Later, I came to know that he wrote in his report that I killed that person though I actually didn't kill him. I told the Chinese leader how it happened and then he asked me, "Why did you do this?" I said, "It was because I received the order from Lhalu. Then he asked, "If Lhalu hadn't given you the order, would you have done that?" "Even if Lhalu hadn't given me the order, I was the local head. If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> reported to me about that I would have had to settle the matter." Then he said, "Do you mean this was done by Lhalu and you didn't do that, right?" I said, "Lhalu told me to do that. Even if Lhalu didn't tell me to do that, I would have had to settle the matter if they reported it to me. It is not good to tell a lie and blame Lhalu." Then the Chinese leader got agitated and he was scolding me a lot and with his accent I could hardly understand. After that, they didn't release me at that time. In 1964, I was sent to the Shigatse Prison and I was locked up with the serf owner prisoners for two months.   

**Q:**  Where was the prison located in Shigatse Dzong?   

**A:**  It was in the grain storeroom [Tib. བཀར་ཁང]. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མངའ་བདག; ch. 领主] Feudal lord, manorial estate holders, serf-owners.">ngadag</a> (feudal lords) were shut in there and it was quite crowded. After that, I was sent to work with the group of blacksmiths repairing bicycles, vehicles and watches. There I was able to learn some technical skills. Then I was sent to the Emagang [Tib. ཨེ་མ་སྒང] State Farm in Shang.   

**Q:**  How many households were there in Emagang?   

**A:**  It was an open space and they dug the earth to about a depth of a human waist and covered it with canvas tents. After that, the prisoners built the houses and planted the fields.   

**Q:**  How many prisoners were there then?   

**A:**  There were about 400 prisoners.   

**Q:**  Were all of them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>?   

**A:**  No, there were just a few <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>. The kudrak who committed serious crimes were locked up in the Shigatse Karkhang (granary).   

**Q:**  What kinds of people were there among the 400 prisoners?   

**A:**  There were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and all kinds of people who were involved in the revolt. After that, they differentiated the prisoners and made a separate group for those doing manual labor. There were also people like us, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> (estate managers). We worked on construction and we also planted the fields.   

**Q:**  Did you have to dig the earth?   

**A:**  We stayed in a cave. After the fields were planted, we molded bricks and built houses. We planted about 3,000 mu of fields.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any irrigation there, right?   

**A:**  We built a very big canal for three months and the irrigation was drawn from the upper part of county.   

**Q:**  You couldn't draw the irrigation from the river, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It was because there was a lot of sand, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How was the yield there?   

**A:**  In the year when we planted 3,000 mu, we got just about one hundred thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 斤] 1.1 pounds (half of a kilogram).">jin</a> of yield. Then we chose the better fields and didn't plant the fields on the mountain and the inferior fields, and planted about 3,000 mu. We got one hundred and twenty or fifty thousand jin.   

**Q:**  Was that from each mu?   

**A:**  No, it was the total yield. In that year, we used good fertilizers and we also planted trees, and our livelihood was also quite good.   

**Q:**  How many years did you stay there?   

**A:**  I stayed sixteen years in Emagang, two years in Rimpung, and two years in Gyantse. Altogether I stayed twenty years in prison.   

**Q:**  From what year to what year were you imprisoned?   

**A:**  From 1960-1979.   

**Q:**  What was in Emagang when you were there?   

**A:**  There was the prison and there was a Labor Camp [Tib. ལས་མི་རུ་ཁག] where the people whose prison terms were over were kept. We build a watermill and planted trees. They didn't let those people go home and they were kept there. There were soldiers in the prison where the prisoners were working.   

**Q:**  Where were you?   

**A:**  I was among the prisoners where there was a unit of one hundred soldiers. The soldiers would follow us whenever we would go to work and they would surround us when we were working. There were also cadres. In 1979, there was an amnesty for prisoners like us who had almost stayed twenty years in prison.   

**Q:**  How many years did they sentence you?   

**A:**  They didn't announce the prison terms for me and they also didn't bring me to the meeting and hold a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> like they did to other prisoners. They knew that I kind of had accomplishments, but they didn't release me. When they sentenced the other prisoners, they would announce it at the meeting, but they didn't do that to me. One day they made me plant twenty pots of flowers. This implied that I had to stay in the prison for twenty years, but I was not attentive to that right at that time. They asked me whether I knew how to plant flowers. I said, "I don't know how to plant flowers. Then they said, "You can plant whatever kind of flowers that you know. You should plant twenty pots of flowers."   

**Q:**  What did they mean?   

**A:**  Later, I knew that they probably implied that my sentence was twenty years. Actually, when I was released it was exactly twenty years. Probably, they might have written it in the verdict, but they didn't give me the verdict.   

**Q:**  How did you contact your home?   

**A:**  In 1972, my elder son was about 11-12 years old. He and my wife came to visit me.   

**Q:**  Did they know that you were in the prison?   

**A:**  They brought me some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, a few breads, a lump of butter the size of a fist and a bottle of cooking oil. I was allowed to meet them and I was told that I was not allowed to talk about things like saying that the livelihood is poor. So I told my wife, "Our livelihood is good."   

**Q:**  For how many years did you not meet your son?   

**A:**  When I was imprisoned, he was four years old.   

**Q:**  Did your son recognize you?   

**A:**  Yes, but he didn't talk and he was just standing over there. After that, they didn't come to visit me.   

**Q:**  How many prisoners were there in one cell?   

**A:**  There were ten prisoners and sometimes, there were eleven prisoners.   

**Q:**  Did you have electric lights?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. We used candles.   

**Q:**  Did you have to work for a fixed time?   

**A:**  Yes, they would blow a whistle to call us to work. Normally, in the morning, right after they opened the prison doors, we were made to do exercise. Then we would wash our faces and go to get the tea. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> was given once every three days and each day it was about one jin. In the morning, we had butter tea and boiled vegetables. At midday, we had black tea and boiled vegetable. In the evening, we were given soup with salt. Later, on Sundays we were given butter tea at noon and a dish with meat. The livelihood improved a lot.   

**Q:**  Who were the other people with you in the same cell?   

**A:**  I can't tell you the names of the prisoners because they would make the prisoners move frequently.   

**Q:**  Do you have any prison-mates in this place?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  Most of them were from Shigatse, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was one from the State Farm in Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གོང་དཀར] who used to be a carpenter, but he died some time age.   

**Q:**  You had been doing farming all the time, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you learn any kind of skills?   

**A:**  At the beginning, we were told to learn technical skills like masonry. But, I was not healthy and couldn't climb up to the higher stories. Some people told me to learn tailoring. I thought I would be unable to learn tailoring. Anyway, I requested that the cadres allow me to learn tailoring but they said, "You have been sitting on the cushion leading your life and even now, do you want to sit on the cushion? It is not alright for you to learn tailoring. You have to do manual labor." So I had to do the farming all the time.   

**Q:**  In the evening, what did you talk to each other about in the cell?   

**A:**  We didn't have the chance to talk much because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</a> were there in the cell. If we talked about the old days, he would report it right away and they would call a meeting and corner us and hold struggle sessions. If some of the bad people would say that they had good livelihoods in the old society and about how they ate the food and enjoyed the festivals, they would inform about it right away and corner that person.   

**Q:**  Did you talk about missing your wife and children in the prison?   

**A:**  Yes, some people were talking about that, but I never talked about that. The inmates were familiar with me because they were from Tö [Tib. སྟོད] and those places. When I was in Rimpung, I didn't have clothes to wear and they gave me a monk's red chupa. So when I was in Gyantse prison, I told the inmates that I was a monk. When they asked me whether I knew Tibetan writing I said, "I don't know it." If I told them that I knew writing, the cadres would get me to write the things about the meetings [held in the prison] during my spare time and at night. They wouldn't let me write during the work time. So this would be an additional suffering. While I was in Gyantse, I could avoid writing things. After I arrived at Emagang, there were some prisoners from Nyemo and they said that I knew writing. So I was made to write all the information about the prisoners. Most of the time, they didn't make me do the manual labor for five to six days and made me to write the materials. When they didn't have much to write, they would make me write it during my spare time.   

**Q:**  In the prison, what kind of study did you have to do?   

**A:**  We were made to read newspapers and we had to discuss these. The main thing was to confess one's errors regarding work and discipline during the week. When some of the prisoners talked surreptitiously about politics, they would expose each other.   

**Q:**  Did they give you a fixed amount of clothes and food?   

**A:**  We were given a garment and trousers made from cloth for the summer and a cotton padded garment and trousers in the winter. And a quilt, shoes and soap.   

**Q:**  Did they give you money?   

**A:**  No. In the beginning they gave us an allotment of tobacco each month, and we used to wrap the tobacco in newspapers and smoke it. We also ground the tobacco and made snuff and took it. Later, they gave us two packets of cigarettes per month and gave sweets to the prisoners who didn't smoke.   

**Q:**  What did you do during the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  I was 37 years old. Usually, I didn't spread rumors and I also didn't take notice when other people spread rumors. I also didn't inform the cadres that they spread rumors. During the Cultural Revolution, they cornered me a lot.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Although they didn't have anything to tell me about other people exposing [my errors], they just told me that I was not talking [at the meetings] and they cornered me very seriously. When I was in the Gyantse State Farm, there was a steward of Taring [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང] who used to be the Senior Tsugdrang in the Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] State Farm. In Gyantse, he was our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</a> and basically he was quite a good person. In Gyantse, we didn't have real houses to live in. We were living in a house built with sod. Even when it was raining, we had to work in the rainfall, our bodies shivering while carrying two pieces of sod on our backs. I was sick so the Team Leader might have felt pity on me and said, "It doesn't matter. The situation will be okay and the Dalai Lama will come back." He implied that Tibet would regain independence. I just said, "Yes," and didn't tell him anything. During the Cultural Revolution when people were cornered very much, he confessed that he told me what I mentioned above. So I was cornered very seriously, but I didn't confess and said that and I didn't tell anything to anybody. At last, they asked me, "What did you tell that person?" I still didn't confess anything. There were also many people who told me let's run away. Once there were eight youngsters who told me that they would carry me on theirs backs and let us go to India. I told them, "Stay still, you can't do that. I am not going. Even if you guys carry me by turns, what are we going to eat if we go to India? We won't be able to escape. I will never inform on this matter. Don't do that and stay still." I never exposed those people, but later on they exposed each other internally. But I still didn't tell that and they didn't tell me anything about this. After that, the cadres made a team of twenty prisoners and they cornered me and another person called Thudola [Tib. སྟོབས་ལགས] who tried to run away for two months. Two cadres were sitting in the meeting where the two of us were cornered. The other person was also very stubborn and I didn't confess at all, but his partner had confessed it. When the prisoners were carrying bricks, Thudola <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> a song with the wording, "Mother! Please, please protect me [Tib. ཨ་མ་ཨོ་ཤི་ཨོ་ཤི་བུ་ལ་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ་གནང་དང]." When his partner named Londen [Tib. བློ་ལྡན] looked at him, he showed his thumbs to Londen to implore that he [would] not confess the matter. The winter study was for two months and when it was almost over, one day I was cornered very seriously when they said that I didn't confess what I was thinking. I said, "I am not guilty." Then they said, "If you are not guilty, how did you get into this prison?" I said, "I was told that they would implement the redeeming policy. But they made a false accusation and I didn't have any chance to talk about that. I am not guilty for being imprisoned even for one day. But I have no choice but to do the work because I was given the food and clothes. So I am working hard." Then they cornered me very seriously. So I didn't have any choice but to say something. So I told them, "I think the 17-Point Agreement had been signed, so therefore, the Dalai Lama will come back and even if he doesn't get total Tibetan independence, he might get half independence like in the area above Shigatse. And we will not have to suffer like this." All the people had that kind of thought, but they didn't say it openly. I thought that I might suffer a very serious <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a>, but it worked out. When I told the above thought, they didn't hold a struggle session. The cadres said, "Today, he talked [about his thoughts]. So from today on, you don't need to be afraid. We will not investigate and punish you." That's all that happened in the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  You had a very hard time and you felt very sad. Actually, what was your thinking at that time?   

**A:**  I thought that the 17-Point Agreement was signed and they said they would implement the redeeming policy. But actually, I had to suffer like this, so the only way was to die. I hoped that I could meet those old soldiers and cadres. They might have been able to redress my situation, otherwise, I didn't have anything to do. In the newspaper it was reported that they were making war with India. So I thought, if we could not gain the Tibetan independence, we will die in prison." Some of the prisoners worked very hard and they also put patches on clothing during the rest time. I didn't do that. Normally, I would wash my face in the morning and mend my vest-like garment worn when carrying loads and my canvas boots. The other prisoners would save two to three garments and put patches on the old one. But, I would receive the yearly clothes and I didn't save them. I had a cushion padded with fur which I got in Rimpung. At that time, the prisoners were not allowed to keep weapons and were also not allowed to keep even needles. And we were not allowed to save tsamba. The cadres would check the belongings of the prisoners frequently. One day, they saw my cushion when they checked the belongings, and the cadres said, "You are using this kind of cushion. Even the Party Secretary Gao [Ch. gao shu ji] doesn't have this kind of cushion." I was agitated and at that time I was not afraid of them thinking that sooner or later they would release me because I was not guilty. I said, "If Secretary Gao wants this cushion, he can stay in the prison and use the cushion and I will get out." Then the cadre said, "You beggar! You are talking too big [Tib. ཁ་རྒྱགས་ཐག་ཆོད]." I told him, "People gave me this cushion. I didn't have that before because all of my belongings were confiscated and I didn't even have clothes to wear."   

**Q:**  Did you have that cushion when you came to the prison?   

**A:**  One of my relatives brought that cushion with the bedding.   

**Q:**  Was Party Secretary Gao the leader of the prison?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the head Chinese [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁབ་པ] of the prison. Then they said, "You are not allowed to use this and they took off the serge cover of the cushion. Then they said, "The other prisoners are saving their clothes, but you are wearing up the yearly allotment of clothes." I said, "In the old society, I never wore this kind of clothing even for my cushions. This is just like the dangling end of cloth [Tib. རས་འཛར]. We have to do manual labor that is very hard, so we have to cut from our garment and patch it on the back of the vest-like garment worn when doing labor." Then they said, "What do you think now?" I said, "I don't have any thoughts. I am just thinking that I am working hard in the prison and I won't have to work so hard after I get out from the prison." They said, "How are you going to make a living?" I said, "No matter, I will make whatever kind of living. I think I won't have to work as hard as this." Actually, I didn't know what the situation would be outside. One of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch.] The head/leader of an office.">dütrang</a> taught me how to harvest. I told him, "I don't need to harvest when I get out from the prison." I just told them what I thought. They also taught us how to use the shovel. They said, "You beggar!" and told me to use the shovel. I said, "I don't know how to use the shovel." Then he took away the shovel and told me to bring the shovel rope. I said, "I don't have a shovel rope." He said, "You have that red silk belt. Untie the belt and use it for the shovel rope." Then I used the silk belt for the shovel rope and he told me to pull it when he used the shovel. He didn't hold the shovel firmly and I pulled the rope strongly so he lost the shovel from his hand and the shovel hit his knee and he said, "This beggar hit my knee with the shovel. From where did this man who doesn't know how to do manual labor come from?" He was astonished and told me to step on (tamp down) the earth where they were building the canal.   

**Q:**  In the evening, normally, wouldn't the prisoners talk about some things because you were together all the time?   

**A:**  When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</a> was good, the prisoners would talk about all the things in the old society surreptitiously.   

**Q:**  What did they talk about?   

**A:**  There was a prisoner from Rimpung who used to recite the o mani prayer though we were not allowed to practice religion. They made a rosary with thread. There was an old man called Lhawang [Tib. ལྷ་དབང] who wrote the numbers of mantras that he recited on the wall. At that time, the soldiers didn't know what that was. At night, the soldiers would listen and then shine the torch and ask what are you doing. The prisoners talked about how the soldiers from the ages of 18-60 were recruited in Rimpung, and how they prepared for the war and how the schools were destroyed and Tibet would gain the independence. There were very unscrupulous people among the prisoners. I was thinking that one day they would inform the cadres about this and I didn't talk with them. I just slept there and they were also not suspicious of me because I didn't inform the cadres. There were some monks from the Chamchen [Tib. བྱམས་ཆེན] Monastery.   

**Q:**  What kind of prayers did you do?   

**A:**  I just recited mantras and some brief <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. སྒྲོལ་མ, 2. གྲོ་མ] 1. The goddess Tara. 2. A woman&#x27;s name. 3. A wild sweet potato.">Droma</a> Prayers. I recited the prayers by heart not moving my lips when they were talking to each other. When I was handcuffed and my legs were shackled, I just slept the whole day. The prisoners were taken to the toilet once in the morning and once in the evening. When we went to get food, they would unlock my handcuffs.   

**Q:**  How was your livelihood in Emagang?   

**A:**  Although the government didn't give any additional foodstuffs, the cook saved some butter and made butter tea on Sundays. The cook also saved a lot of tea bricks, like 70 tea bricks, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, and butter. Sometimes, they would make <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བག་ཐུག] A soup that contains a mixture of tiny dough (flour) balls the size of a fingernail (and if available, cheese, meat, and radishes).">bagthug</a> soup with tsamba. When we were in Emagang, the livelihood was quite good.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the households of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>?   

**A:**  We were not allowed to go there. Whenever we would go to work, we had to march in a line and the soldiers would follow us. Sometimes, we were brought to clear the canals together with the masses. The masses would just go through the motions of going there and work a little bit just after they arrived there. Then the masses boiled their tea and sat on the lawn and chit-chatted and did some handiwork until lunch. After lunch, actually, we had to work for three hours, but the masses would not come to work. Just before the work was knocked off, the masses would work a little bit. We didn't have any chance to talk with the masses.   

**Q:**  When did you learn the Chinese language?   

**A:**  I don't know Chinese. In the past, when I was making the list of people, I knew quite good Chinese.   

**Q:**  What did you know at that time?   

**A:**  The names of the fields, the number of animals and number of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> seed. When two of cadres were with me, they spoke Chinese, so I knew quite a lot. But, after I was shut up in the prison, I forgot all of my Chinese because I didn't have the chance to speak Chinese.   

**Q:**  The officials in the prison were all Chinese, right?   

**A:**  They were Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Did they speak Tibetan to you?   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't speak Chinese. The leaders gave lectures in Chinese at the meetings and there were Tibetan interpreters.   

**Q:**  What kind of songs did you know?   

**A:**  They taught us the song, "The east is red [Ch. dong fang hong]" and there were many other songs, but I forgot them. We had to sing songs when we went to work.   

**Q:**  What song did you have to sing?   

**A:**  The song, "To sail on the ocean [Ch. da hai hang xing]."   

**Q:**  What kind of songs do you remember now? Just sing a song please.   

**A:**  I forgot the songs.   

**Q:**  Did they show you movies?   

**A:**  It was funny when we went to watch movies. In winter, we felt very cold when watching movies. When we saw some people eating food in the movies, our mouths watered in anticipation. So when we got back we had to eat some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>. So the tsamba ran out before the due time. At that time, I was sick. So the tsamba, which was given once every three days, was just enough. Normally, the young prisoners would run out of their tsamba in two days. So they didn't have any tsamba on the third day and they just had to depend on some boiled vegetables and black tea.   

**Q:**  How many times did they show movies in a year?   

**A:**  Every month they showed movies.   

**Q:**  What kind of movies did you watch?   

**A:**  The movies were about the People's Liberation Army making war and dances and songs performed in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What else did you see? What was your most favorite movie?   

**A:**  They showed a lot of movies [about] making war.   

**Q:**  What happened in the year 1979? That was when the policy become relaxed, right?   

**A:**  In 1976, there was a document issued by Premier Zhou saying that criminals should also be regarded as human beings [Tib. ཉེས་པ་ཅན་མི་ལ་རྩི་དགོས]. It said that this was an order from Chairman Mao. Since then, the policy became slightly better.   

**Q:**  What happened after that? Did they release prisoners from the prison when you were there?   

**A:**  Yes, the prisoners who had finished serving their terms like 5-6-15 years, were released, but they didn't let them go home. They kept them in the Labor Camp [Tib. ལས་མི་རུ་ཁག].   

**Q:**  How many times did your family members come to visit you?   

**A:**  They came once only in 1972. The other people's family members who were living nearby came many times to visit them and their livelihood was quite good. Those were the masses who were arrested during the "Three Great Education" [Tib. སློབ་གསོ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ] campaign. Our livelihood also got better because the families of those people brought them a lot of food. Otherwise, sometimes we didn't even get salt to eat. At that time, they gave us some tea.   

**Q:**  In 1979, what did they say when you were released?   

**A:**  In the first month of 1979, Tsewang Ngodrub [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་དངོས་གྲུབ] from Namling [Tib. རྣམ་གླིང] County and I were released. At that time, they didn't send other people home. The other prisoner was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</a> and the two of us were said to be better off. The two of us were told that we could go home. I was sick and when I was brought to the Labor Camp, I heard all about the situation in the society like the livelihood was very poor and the people didn't have food to eat. Some people told me that "It would be better to remain in the Labor Camp because you are sick and can not work and the family members' livelihood is poor. So they will have a hard time if you go home." Therefore, I requested the cadres to keep me in the Labor Camp.   

**Q:**  Didn't you go home?   

**A:**  No, I remained in the Labor Camp. At that time, Labor Camp members were paid 24 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> per month as the salary and the livelihood was good in there. The work was also easy and there were no soldiers following us. I was made to clean the brooms because I was sick for three months. After that, I was sent to sell cow milk for the Labor camp. There were twelve cows and I took the milk in a kettle and went to sell them to the cadres for two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 毛] A Chinese currency unit. 10 maotse = 1 yuan. 10 fen = one maotse.">maotse</a> per bottle. When I got better, I did a little bit of farming.   

**Q:**  When did they rehabilitate you completely?   

**A:**  That was just at the end of that year. In the beginning, I requested them to keep me in the Labor Camp and I stayed there from the first month until the twelfth month of 1979. My wife and children were in Nyemo and my mother-in-law was in Tölung Dechen [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་བདེ་ཆེན] County. She pretended to be mute for three years but she talked at home surreptitiously. There was a Party Secretary called Könchog Wangmo [Tib. དཀོན་ཅོག་དབང་མོ]. She came to do publicity and on the day my mother-in-law started talking, when she was asked, "What request do you have?," she told her, "I have a daughter in Nyemo. Please transfer her residence card to Tölung." Then they gave her the certificate right away and my wife was transferred to Tölung. One day, I received a letter from home saying that they had got transferred to Tölung and they wanted me to come there. Then I requested them to send me to Tölung. They said they had to report this to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> and it took until the twelfth month to make the decision. During that period, they paid 24 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> per month. The livelihood was good and they gave us butter tea in the morning with fried vegetables. For lunch there was fried vegetables with meat and black tea. In the evenings, there was butter tea also. The other people had about 70 yuan in salary, but their money always ran out because they didn't eat in the Labor Camp. They contacted the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and bought meat and those things. I ate in the Labor Camp and saved the money. In the 12th month, I was transferred to Tölung. We didn't have a house there, so we rented a house and stayed there doing farming. After that they divided the lands of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> (brigade in commune) after the rukhag was dispersed.   

**Q:**  This was in 1986, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When I got there in Tölung in 1979-80, it was the time of the rukhag. When they divided the lands, we got shares for three people. They asked whether I wanted the land or not. I said, "I don't want land because I can't work on it." I did a little farming and most of the time, I stayed home and copied medical texts for the Mentsigang. If I went there to copy it, they paid two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> per day, but I didn't have a place to stay overnight So I requested to take the texts home and copy them there.   

**Q:**  Did you have to copy this?   

**A:**  Yes. I had to copy the four medical texts, the Gyüshi. They paid one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> per page with six lines at the front and back when I copied the old torn up texts.   

**Q:**  Did you have to write in the printing script?   

**A:**  No, it was the handwriting script. I copied the texts for about two years. They paid according to the number of pages so normally I would get up early in the morning, make a good tea and start copying and write until it was almost dark. I could write ten pages per day. I also wrote twice during the whole night. I could write more at night because nobody was talking to me. After writing three nights, I thought that it would affect my eyes and I didn't write at night any more. If I wrote day and night, I could write twenty pages. If I could write ten pages a day, I could get 300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> per month. The other writers left a big space at the top and bottom of the page but I left an appropriate space. So they paid five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 毛] A Chinese currency unit. 10 maotse = 1 yuan. 10 fen = one maotse.">maotse</a> more to me. Sometimes, I could get 700 yuan and regularly, I got 300 yuan per month.   

**Q:**  At that time, what contact did you have with Lhasa? You might have heard about the situation in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  I could hear the news in Lhasa and about implementing the policies. I heard that the soldier who used to be the interpreter [when I was working for them] was in the 7.1 State Farm [Ch. qi yi nong chang]. I went to find him, but I couldn't find him. The Chinese woman was there, but she had changed her nature because she thought that she might get involved in my matter and she said, "I don't have anything to say." She said many cadres who were there at that time had been transferred to China. Actually, she worked with me for four months. After that, I found the Chinese who was in Bayi and he had become a director [Ch. ju zhang]. He also didn't treat me well. He had a high position. He sent a letter and wrote that he had sealed the Lhalu's estate, but he didn't seal my house. You can ask in detail to the cadres like Tsamjö [Tib. མཚམས་གཅོད]. After that, I also went to Shigatse several times and they investigated for two years. Then I was told to go to Shigatse. I delivered the letter to the United Front Work Bureau [Tib. ཏོང་ཞན་བུ]. Before going to Shigatse, I went to get the letter from the United Front and they said they lost the letter. After that, I went to Rimpung and they said that they had my confession materials. I said, "You have forced me to confess. I will not accept this." There were some bad people over there and they didn't take notice of me. After that, a document was passed down saying, "In general, they will not implement the policy again, but they should implement the policy for the cases that were wrongly decided at the time of the reinvestigation for the reforms." Then I went to the Middle Court [Tib. འབྲིང་རིམ་ཁྲིམས་ཁང] in Shigatse. The senior judge was called Dawa [Tib. ཟླ་བ]. I went to see him, but he also didn't treat me well. He just made pleasant sounds to me and he actually said, "I can't decide this case. You have to go to Nyemo County." Then I went to Nyemo County to find the documents. They said that all the documents were burned during the revolt in Nyemo. But Nyemo County treated me nicely and the county cadres and the soldiers in the Department of Armed Forces [Ch. wu zhuang bu] searched for the document for three days. The leaders didn't trust the cadres when they said there was no document, so the leaders themselves went to search for the documents, but they didn't find them. Finally, they said, "We will look for the document and you should also try to find it. If we implement the policy for you [at] this time, it won't be stable and it might get rejected in the future." After that, the leaders borrowed some documents for me and told me, "You should tell the judge that you borrowed the document from the leaders." I showed the document to the Judge of Shigatse saying that I borrowed this document from the leaders. The leaders only have this document. Then there was a female cadre working in the Civil Administration Bureau [Ch. min zheng ju] who used to be a cadre in Nyemo. She also sent a letter indicating that when she was a cadre in Nyemo, I didn't join the revolt. I had three documents to show, but Judge Dawa didn't take any notice. There was a Party Secretary called Pema in Rimpung and a judge in Rimpung. The Party Secretary said something true, "If it would be necessary to implement the policy for you, you will get the portion of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླུ་ཉོའི་སྲིད་ཇུས] The Chinese government&#x27;s policy of compensating the bourgeoisie/lords for the loss of their property and possessions.">redeeming policy</a> according to the policy. But, if we would give you this portion, there are many similar people like you so it would be endless to give it to all of them." I said, "You can't say that. It is a matter whether the people are qualified to get the implementation of the policy. It is not a matter of implementing the policy if there are a few people and not to implement the policy if there are many people. If you decide the matter justly, the State will pay the money. You don't need to pay that." Finally, they just went through the motions of going to investigate in my homeland. At that time, the household where I told them to keep the gun told the cadres that I helped the People's Liberation Army and the cook also proved that I had the document saying that they will implement the redeeming policy. But, they disregarded [about] all of this. Then they told me to go back and said, "We will inquire about the matter and you should also inquire about this. You should come later." Then I said, "This is the third time so now I am not going to come again. If you could do me a favor, please do it this time. Otherwise, I am going to bear the misfortune." Then they said, "Actually, you had relations with the reactionaries when you went to Paldi and Lhalu is also a reactionary. If you say that, your crime will become more serious." I said, "Why?"   

