# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0433.03 : Tape 3  
## : with Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibetan Autonomous Region, Tibetan Autonomous Region/China  
**Date of Interview:** 1998  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Ben Jiao  
**Name:** Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The subject was a miser of the Lhalu aristocratic family who became an estate manager for Lhalu. In this interview, he describes in detail being in charge of Lhalu's 9 estates located in the Nyemo Yagde area. He discusses the many different estates the Lhalu family had in Kongpo, Lhoka, Rimpung and near Lhasa, including all the names and the locations. He also discusses his interactions with Chushigandru and the PLA in Paldi in 1957-1959.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0433_03/H_0433_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Yesterday, we talked about a headman of Yamdrog [Tib. ཡམ་འབྲོག] Trälham [Tib. བཀྲས་ལྷམ] who had fled, right?   

**Q:**  Oh, Yes. What's his name?   

**A:**  Trinley Phüntso [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས་ཕུན་ཚོགས]. He had a single hair knot [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག] to show his rank. The lay officials of the Tibetan government used to have two hair knots. At that time, 1958, a disease epidemic was affecting his village. This occurred pretty close to the revolt. I went to that area to collect taxes in the 12th month of 1958 and when we were collecting taxes, we judged a lawsuit. The lawsuit was about the epidemic disease had been affecting the local people and had caused many people's deaths. A medium came from another place and he went through the motions of going into trance and gave the prophecy that they should perform certain rituals, and he himself performed the rituals for them. However, the people didn't recover from the illness and 1-2 people died in almost every household. I heard that one household had probably four or five people who died one after another. The medium had performed the rituals for the household. When the last one passed away, the medium himself brought the body to the sky burial. About 40 people died in the disease epidemic. Because of those reasons, the villagers did not trust him and when we were in their village, people complained saying, "The medium just went through the motions of going into trance and not only didn't he cure the people, he caused more and more peoples' deaths. Therefore, please don't let the medium stay in this place."   

**Q:**  What was his name?   

**A:**  I do not remember his name, but he was an old man who was probably 50 years old.   

**Q:**  Did he belong to the Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ] sect?   

**A:**  He was just an ordinary medium. Then I called him and whipped him two hundred times and expelled him from the village [for being a false medium]. Yesterday I told you about how another man ran away, and I whipped him and he died. The root cause of this law case was that there was a pasture for grazing animals under the Lhodrag's Senge Dzong [Tib. ལྷོ་བྲག་སེང་གེ་རྫོང] and the pasture adjoining that land belonged to one our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> called Tsenru [Tib. བཙན་ར྄ུ]. Regarding this matter, Tsenru filed a lawsuit to the local government or Lhalu, and then I received a letter from Lhalu telling me to settle the matter. While I was trying to settle the law case, there was a theft [of a horse and yak ] in a watermill in that place. The victim of the theft was related to the household under the Senge Dzong. The thief was a poor nomad who had a wife and a child but didn't have any land. After the things were stolen from that household, the stolen things came to be known. When I called him, he didn't confess so I whipped him 200 times and shut him up in prison. They were very poor and his wife came to me and told me about the theft, but he didn't confess the theft. So I told him, "The main thing was done by your leader [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད]. You are poor, so we will not treat you badly, but you should confess the theft. If you confess, we won't punish you." The wife told me that the leader who had ran away to Lhasa had told her husband, "No matter how many times they would whip you, do not confess. I will file a lawsuit [in Lhasa] and I will not let you down." He was capable of filing law cases. So the nomad was scared and he didn't confess at all.   

**Q:**  You whipped him 200 times, right?   

**A:**  Yes, He didn't scream when he was whipped.   

**Q:**  Did you take his pants off?   

**A:**  Yes, [but] they didn't whip him very seriously. Later, one of his relatives told me that they applied eggs mixed with the poison called Tsendug [Tib. བཙན་དུག] and treated his wound, and they also gave him some medicine [Tib. གཉན་སྨན], but he died.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  Later, he [the leader] said that he would go to report the case to Lhalu. Lhalu thought that I had whipped him to death so he reported to the Kashag that he didn't die because of the whipping, but rather died from gonorrhea [Tib. གྲན་གཞི] so they didn't ask me about that. Later, I received a letter from Lhalu saying that they had settled the case in this way and I didn't get punished. After that, I confiscated all of his belongings and animals, and gave them to 8 people working on the estate, like the grain measurer, the cook, the yak herder, the person who weighs things and the clerk. I confiscated the horse stolen by the thief and one yak. In the twelfth month, I finished collecting the taxes there and came back to Nyemo. The place from where I collected the taxes was under Ling Dzong [Tib. གླིང་རྫོང]. One of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> of Ling Dzong called Dochö Samden [Tib. རྡོ་ཆོས་བསམ་གཏན] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> Lingwön Pema Kelsang [Tib. གླིང་དབོན་པད་མ་སྐལ་བཟང] came to mediate the case, but that didn't work out. Pema Kelsang was the estate manager and a very nice and humble person, though he was from a lay official family. After I left that place, the other party reported to Ling Dzong, and they called our misers and whipped them.   

**Q:**  Actually, did you have the authority to collect the taxes?   

**A:**  Yes, I did. Normally, Ling Dzong would receive the edict from the government and was the one in charge of the horse corvée and those things, but I would collect the taxes in-kind.   

**Q:**  That was in 1958, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the 12th month of 1958 I went back to Nyemo. The revolt broke [out] in the March. At that time, I almost had to confront the Ling Dzong head. So I sent a message to the 25 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers who were in Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] as guards and I planned to confront Ling Dzong. In the meantime, the revolt took place.   

**Q:**  Where were you when the revolt broke out?   

**A:**  I was in Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ]. The Khambas who were said to be the troops of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> blocked the highway between Nyemo to Lhasa. So we were unable to go to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did some Khambas arrive in your village?   

**A:**  In 1958, some Khambas went from Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ] to Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤང་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] to get [government] guns [stored there]. There were about a hundred or 50-60 Khambas. At that time, the Preparatory Committee of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> [PCTAR] had been set up and the People's Liberation Army had arrived [in Tibet]. Therefore, they [the PCTAR] reported this to the County Level Bureaus [Tib. རྫོང་རིམ་པའི་དོན་གཅོད་ཁང] and the People's Liberation Army soldiers were sent from Markyang [Tib. མར་རྐྱང] and also from Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] to Nyemo. Many soldiers arrived and they trapped the Khambas in Nyemo's Mönkhar Dzong [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་སྨོན་མཁར་རྫོང]. The Khambas were also blocked in Markyang and they fought there. This was probably on the 8th of the 8th Tibetan month. Since we were situated on the other side of the river, we could hear the sounds of the canons/ mortars. I heard that many People's Liberation Army soldiers were killed, but we didn't see them. Even though many soldiers were killed, a great number of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> reinforcement came while the Khambas didn't have reinforcements. I heard that the Khambas fought a lot in that place. I also heard that there were soldiers from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment [among the Khambas]. Finally, the Khambas ran away. They crossed the river in coracles from our homeland and went through the road towards Drigu at the lower part of the valley. They didn't come to my house, but I heard that two of the Khambas asked for lodging at the Pelung [Tib. དཔལ་ལུང] estate, which belonged to our estate. After that, they went to Paldi [Tib. དཔལ་དི]. One of our Yagde <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> [Tib. གཡག་སྡེ] called Lhojangwa [Tib. ལྷོ་བྱང་བ] and the nomad Degye [Tib. སྡེ་བརྒྱད] went to Nangkartse to do trading, and they met up with the Khambas who robbed their horses. Actually, they were misers of the Pelung estate. They should have come to me, but they didn't come to me and went to Pelung estate. A Khambas who was lodging in Pelung Shiga without consulting me, sent a letter to the other Khambas because he knew them, and those Khambas returned the horses. If they had come to me at that time, it would have been very dangerous to deal with the Khambas because of the revolt, so I would have compensated them [the household whose horses were robbed] from the estate and from the common miser. After that, the Khambas told the other Khambas, "The lodging inn of Pelung Shiga which belongs to Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] had sent a letter, so we had to return the horses." Then the Khambas sent a letter to us through the two of them [the owners of the horses] at night saying, "Now we have already eaten the barley from the 18 dzongs in Lhoka and now we are coming to take over Lhalu's estate. Lhalu and his wife are getting 300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> each as a salary per month from the Chinese." They didn't deliver this letter to me right away. If they had delivered the letter to me right away and if the person was there, I wouldn't have let him go and I would have whipped him. I would do that because this was dangerous. But the person who delivered the letter had already left. So [I thought that] if I would do too much and chase after him, the Khambas would rise up.   

**Q:**  Who sent the letter?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> Khambas sent the letter through the two people who came back with the horses. Otherwise, the Khambas had left and we would not have been involved in the revolt. At that time, I didn't know what to do. There were 16 estates under my management. Some of them belonged to Lhalu and some of them belonged to other aristocrats and monasteries. Therefore, I called a meeting of all the estate managers.   

**Q:**  Did you go there to arrange the meeting?   

**A:**  I stayed home. My house was located near the estate. In the estate there was a place where the office was held and there was another place where we used to stay before the office was held. I prepared for a meal to be served to the estate managers coming to the meeting. I was the head [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] of the 16 estates and the estate where I was living was called Khangsar [Tib. ཁང་གསར] estate. Among the 16 estates, there was a monastic estate called Barthang Pelrab [Tib. བར་ཐང་དཔལ་རབ] estate.   

**Q:**  Which monastery did that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> belong to?   

**A:**  It belonged to Drepung. There was also another monastic estate called Kharnga Shiga [Tib. འཁར་རྔ]. Bamo estate belonged to the Drepung Jiso [Tib. འབྲས་སྤུངས་སྤྱི་བསོ] and Wang [Tib. དབང] estate belonged to Kyentsal [Tib. སྐྱེད་ཚལ] Monastery. Among the estates that belonged to aristocrats, there was Bodrong estate [Tib. འབོད་གྲོང] and Barthang Da estate [Tib. བར་ཐང་མདའ] which belonged to Thönpa. Pecha estate belonged to Thubden Gelek [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་དགེ་ལེགས], this was a very small one. The following <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> belonged to Lhalu: Metso [Tib. སྨད་ཚོ] estate, Pelung estate, Phusum [Tib. ཕུ་གསུམ] estate, Sakar [Tib. ས་དཀར] estate, Barthang Gongmo [Tib. བར་ཐང་གོང་མོ] estate, Yendrong [Tib. ཡན་གྲོང] estate, Je [Tib. བྱ྄ེ] estate and Reu [Tib. དབྲེའུ]. The other estates had to perform work for their taxes, but I didn't need to work. However, I had to pay the barley taxes. Among the estates mentioned above, Yendrong, Je and Reu used to be aristocratic estates before they belonged to Lhalu [who got them] when Lhalu became <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a>, the family of the [12th] Dalai Lama. After they belonged to Lhalu, the previous holders of these became Lhalu's subjects/servants and they could no longer wear hair knots [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག] like those worn by regular lay officials [two hair knots on the head] and they had to pay about 500-600 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of tax to Lhalu's estate. These three shiga had about 20-30 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> households who had to pay a little bit for the land lease, about 5-6-10 khe of barley to Lhalu. And they also have to pay the remaining taxes to the three shiga.   

**Q:**  How many estates did Lhalu have altogether?   

**A:**  The above mentioned estates were under my management. Altogether there were 9 estates in Yagde area, among these 9 estates, Pecha estate was exchanged with the Chushul Thongga estate [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར་མཐོང་དགའ].   

**Q:**  To which county did those estate belong?   

**A:**  They were under the jurisdiction of Rinpung [Tib. རིན་སྤུངས] County.   

**Q:**  Did those belong to Rinpung County in the past?   

**A:**  No. In the past, they belonged to Nyemo Mönkhar Dzong. During the reinvestigation of the reforms, theSE areas were divided according to the two sides of Yarlung River. The other [south] side of the river belonged to Rinpung and this side [north] of the river belonged to Nyemo.   

**Q:**  When did they divide that?   

**A:**  It was in 1960. Actually, we were nearer to Nyemo. It only takes a half day to reach Nyemo, but we had to cross a mountain pass when we went to Rinpung and that took a whole day.   

**Q:**  Lhalu also had estates in other places like Kongpo, right?   

**A:**  The above mentioned estates were only the estates that were under my management. Basically, Lhalu had many other big estates. In the past, Nyemo's Mönkhar Dzong also belonged to Lhalu, but later it was offered to the government during the time of the Regent Reting. In the Nyemo area there was the Sharam estate [Tib. ཤར་རམ], the Semo [Tib. ཟས་མོ] estate in Sey [Tib. ཟས] area, the Yamda [Tib. ཡབ་མདའ] estate, the Yamda Dekyi Khangsar [Tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཁང་གསར] estate, the Jangyab [Tib. ལྕང་རྒྱབ] estate in Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ], which was a big estate, and the Tashi Thöndrub [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དོན་གྲུབ] estate in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  In which county was that?   

**A:**  At that time it was under Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང] County. In that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, there was a small estate called Lapa [Tib. ལ་པ] estate. There was Tashi Treling [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བཀྲས་གླིང] estate in Kongpo and there was the Garchag estate, which was the biggest estate. It was where I stayed. There was also an estate in Wölga [Tib. འོལ་དགའ] given to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> of the 12th Dalai Lama which was called the Trungkhang [Tib. འཁྲུངས་ཁང] estate. There were 10 estates not including the 9 estates in Yagde. Lhalu was the family of two Dalai Lamas and for the previous one [8th], many estates were granted. And for the 12th Dalai Lama, they just added one more estate because many estate had already been granted.   

**Q:**  After that, how did you celebrate the New Year?   

**A:**  I celebrated the New Year in the estate in Nyemo. After we received the letter from the Khambas, we prepared the things, and it was probably on the 15th of the Tibetan 1st month when he Khambas came and all of the estate managers went to receive them taking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves.   

**Q:**  How many Khambas were there?   

**A:**  There were 15 of them. It was at the Yagde Khangsar estate. At the beginning, we served tea to the Khambas and then I lent the estate one load of butter to be given to the Khambas. They gave the butter and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf to them. Otherwise, usually, they would collect the butter from the miser.   

**Q:**  Did all of the Khambas carry guns?   

**A:**  Yes, they had guns and swords. I was told to sit there and so I sat down there. We just offered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves and didn't have anything to say so the other estate managers left. I ddn't know the Khambas, but the lodging inn keeper knew them. [Among them],there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> who was from Amdo. All of the other 15 soldiers were from Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམ].   

**Q:**  Was the Magji from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  He was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, but I don't know which part of Amdo. All of them had killed people in the revolt. I heard that they did not appoint someone a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> until he had killed 100 people. I am not sure whether or not he actually killed 100 people. Anyway, he was appointed as the gyagpön. Then we served the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s tea and they also told them to serve me tea. Then they asked me, "This estate belongs to Lhalu, right?" I said, "Yes." Then they told me the same as they had written in the letter and said, "Lhalu and his wife are getting 300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> as a salary from the Chinese per month. You are a volunteer for Lhalu, right? So we are going to kill you." When they talked about Lhalu, I got very angry. Two of the leaders were sitting on a high seat and the other Khambas' faces became red and they were touching their swords. Then I told them, "I am not a volunteer [worker]. In 1957, I was appointed as the estate manager by force when I filed a lawsuit to the Office for Settling Civil Disputes [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས]. As a result of this, I accepted the job of collecting the taxes from the misers, settling civil disputes and delivering the income to Lhalu. I didn't have any choice but to accept to do those things. I did not volunteer. Otherwise, until now, there hadn't been any talk about Chushigandru." Then they said, "Anyway, we are going to kill you, seal the estate, and take away all the barley; and we are going to move our regiment here." Then I told them, "It will not work out if you do like this, because in this place hay for the horses and mules is very scarce though we can give you barley for the fodder. Secondly, basically the grain had belonged to Lhalu, but now it does not belong to Lhalu because they had already sold the grain to repay loans to the Phurbujog [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་ལྕོག] Labrang [Tib. བླ་བྲང]. So please don't be like this." The Amdo was very aggressive and they almost beat me up. Then the Khamba who had asked for lodging on the estate told the other Khambas not to be like this; and he was more powerful. The Magji was like a crazy person and was trying to fire his gun. Then they asked me whether I had a horse or not. I said, "I have one horse." Then they asked me whether I had gun or not. I said, "I have one, but I left it in Lhasa." They asked me how many guns I have. I said I have three guns, two mausers and one Japanese rifle called Ripin Jagshub [Tib. རི་པིན་ལྕགས་ཤུབས]. Here I have only two bullet cases consisting of 5 bullets each. All of the other 200 bullets were left in Lhasa. In fact, I actually had a Mauser rifle with me, but I took it to the monastery and hid it behind the statues. Then they said that they wanted the bullets and [I] gave them to them. Then they said that they were going to do the target shooting and asked me whether I knew how to shoot. I said yes. They had different kinds of rifles, like the 303 English carbine, and we did target shooting together. They said, "You are a crack shot. You are going to challenge us [Tib. ཁ་གཏད་བཅག]." I said, "No, this is not for challenging you. I just did target shooting for fun; just like playing." When I stayed in Kongpo, I used to go hunting. After that, they kind of calmed down. The main thing was that we entertained them well, so they calmed down. Then they told me to call all the people in that area who make smoke rise [Tib. དུ་བ་གནམ་གཏོང] to a meeting [i.e., every household large and small]. Being the chief of that area, I didn't have any choice but to send the letter summoning the people. Then we called the meeting at the big threshing field.   

**Q:**  How many misers got together at that time?   

**A:**  Probably, there were over 1,000 people. When we count the villages, two of the villages had only one nomad household each. Altogether there were 27 villages.   

**Q:**  How many households were there?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. The Khambas talked a lot at the meeting. We didn't have any thoughts regarding the revolt. Before that, the cadres from the China had come to that place to set up schools and such things for the Preparatory Committee of the TAR. In Rinpung County, they [Khambas] did many things and prepared for war by recruiting people between the ages of 18-60. However, I told the people in our area, "Do not meddle in those matters like setting up schools." This was a kind of crime that I committed. Then I told them, "We won't be capable to make war. You had better remain still because we didn't get any order from the local [Tibetan] government. If we meddle in these matters without understanding them, there would be trouble. We don't know what would happen and who is going to do what. Do not say anything regarding opposing the Chinese. Whoever tells you anything, just remain still. When the matter is settled in the future, it will have a result whatever it may be."   

**A:**  The Khambas said that they are the Army to Defend the Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དམག་སྒར] and they have a great regiment in Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ]. They were also talking badly about the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  What did they say?   

**A:**  They said, "The Panchen Lama is pro-Chinese. He is like a Chinese spy. He is the same as the Chinese, and he is opposing the Tibetans. So we are going to eliminate those people. All of you should have solidarity and you are not allowed to use the ferry and coracles. You have to seal them and you have to block the mountain pass." They took agreements regarding this from each of the households.   

**Q:**  Did they talk about Tibetan independence?   

**A:**  They didn't say that, but actually, they meant independence because they said, "We are going to eliminate the Chinese. All of you should have solidarity and we should make war." At that time, the agreement was written by Barthang Trinley [Tib. བར་ཐང་འཕྲིན་ལས]. After they put seals om the agreement, I was told to write my name at the bottom and seal it. I said, "I am not going to put my seal on it." They said, "Why?" I said, "I am not a miser. I am the chief [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and I am the person who is giving the orders when I receive the orders from the local government and Lhalu. I am the person who made the people do whatever I was told from above. If I would put my seal on the agreement, I would have to take the responsibility and I would have to bear the responsibility if the households would violate something because I am the chief. According to present custom, there is no rule telling me to seal the agreement. So please don't say this to me. You told me to call the people, and didn't I send them letters? This is because I have the authority to do that. Didn't I call all the people to come? I did whatever you told me like getting the agreement from the people. I am not going to tell them that they are not allowed to seal the agreement. But if I [sald] did this, it would be a violation." The Khambas said, "That is not right." Then I said, "They sealed the agreement so they will take responsibility. I will not say anything bad to stop them from doing that." Like this, I [in the end] didn't have to seal the agreement myself. After that, they told me to take a person from the estate and seal the ferry and the coracles. I couldn't refuse it, and I had to go there and take the coracles and the ferry on this side of the river and seal them [stopping their use]. I was also told to guard the mountain pass. I told the Khambas not to move to our place and they just stayed for 5-6 days. During that time, we entertained them well and supplied fodder for their horses and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> for themselves. Later, they didn't insist on saying that they wanted grain. They wanted my horse, but I said that I only had one horse. This was true. Then they told me to exchange the horse with one of theirs, but I still refused to do that. So they didn't rob the horse or any other things. One of the Khambas wanted me to sell him some woolen bedding. I couldn't refuse this and he took it and asked me the price. However, I told him I don't want any money for it. When their leaders learned that, they said that "We have 20 points in our rules, so you are not allowed to take the bedding. We are not robbing things from the misers, though there were some Khambas that did that." And then they returned the woolen bedding.   

**Q:**  What were the 20 rules?   

**A:**  They was for prohibiting robbing, drinking beer, raping women and so on.   

**Q:**  Did they drink <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a>?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. Those <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s were kind of well-disciplined and they did not rob things. After that, they left and went back. At that time they said, "If you don't accept the task of sealing the ferry and coracles, our regiment will move to this place." I agreed to that and I also said that "We will supply the fodder for the horses and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> if you want. But I am not the only person supplying these things. Normally, I would collect them from the misers and supply [to Lhaul] them when we would pay the taxes." After that, some of the construction workers in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> came to Nyemo and somehow they might have broken the seal on the coracle and then met two Khambas in Rimpung. They were seized saying that they were Chinese spies and they took them to Paldi [Tib. དཔལ་དི]. One of them was put on a cross and [they] took him to the bank of the lake and killed him. The other was whipped and hanged from the ceiling. After that, they sent me a letter saying, "You have let the Chinese spies pass, so you, the estate manager, should come to Paldi." This was probably on the 20th of the first month. Then I sent letters to the estate manager and also the headman as the representative of the misers, and we went to the Khambas on the 22nd. I don't remember the month. Altogether, there were 150 Khamba soldiers with the same Magji, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and the 15 Khambas who had come to our estate staying in the household called Dekhang [Tib. བདེ་ཁང] in Paldi. When we got there, they scolded us very severely saying, "You sealed the agreement with us, but you let the Chinese spies go through. We put one of them on a cross and killed him, and one of them is there." When we looked down, he was absolutely naked and had been whipped on his back and there were wounds on his back. He was hung up attached to the ceiling with a grinding stone tied to his legs. He wasn't dead at that time. Then the Khambas said, "We are also going to make you people become like him." I was supposed to be the chief conspirator, so they told me, "You and the coracle operator will be killed. Each of the others will be whipped 500 times." I begged for mercy and told them, "Please don't do this." The other people also cried. I was extremely scared and shocked. I couldn't think straight. I just thought something terrible was going to happen. At that time, only the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> was drinking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> there. We didn't serve chang when they came to the estate. He was drunk, and he took down a rifle and loaded it and tried to shoot. Then I put on my cap and grabbed his rifle and pointed the gun to the sky and told him, "Please don't do this. We have reasons to tell you. We didn't do any lawless things." Then the other Khambas also told him not to do that and they took his gun away. While they were cornering us in that place, they received a letter saying that the Tsurphu Karmapa [Tib. མཚུར་བུ་ཀར་མ་པ] Lama was coming. Then we were able to get through this, and they told us to go home and that they would settle this tomorrow. Then they went to receive the Karmapa Lama and there were, altogether, 150 riders carrying rifles. We also went to see the Karmapa staying in some corners of the houses.   

**Q:**  Did you see the Karmapa?   

**A:**  Yes, the Karmapa arrived at Paldi at sunset together with many retinue. Some of them were riding horses and some were coming after yaks. On that night, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s said that they were going to hand us over to the lodging inn [Tib. གནས་ཚང་ར་སྤྲོད], which meant that the lodging would have to keep watch on us for the night. However, that night I went to see the Karmapa Lama and told him about what the had Khambas done and I told him, "The Khambas told us to go to the lodging inn for tonight because the Karmapa Lamais coming and that they will settle the matter regarding us tomorrow. So please help us." I knew Karmapa from before when he came to our estate with Nenang Pawo [Tib. གནས་ནང་དཔའ་བོ] Rimpoche. So he recognized me right away and said, "Pawo Rimpoche has already left and Lhasa is finished and now there is nothing. Are you still staying like this? Let's go together [to India]." But at that time I didn't know that the revolt had been quelled. I never thought that the situation would be like this and I told him, "Regarding leavimg, I have to do all the farming work and at home there is my wife and children, and the children are all small. So I am going to come later on. If you meet Pawo Rimpoche there, please tell him about me." Usually, Karmapa would talk in a kidding way, but he showed me a kind of serious look and said, "Oh! Are you really going to stay? There is not much time, but I will tell the Khambas about that." Then I went back home. The Karmapa was going to leave the next morning and I was called there, and the Khamba's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> were also there. I was told to sit there and the Karmapa said to me, "There will be no problem." But I was still worried about what would happen. Then the Karmapa left, they called us and and said things were okay. They said, "In accordance with your mistake, we planned to kill you as we told you yesterday. But this time, the Karmapa gave us the order [not to kill you] so we can't go against his order. Therefore, this time your life is spared, but in the future [if you do that again] we will kill you right away." We still didn't know about the revolt in Lhasa and after that, the Khambas again came and stayed for 5-6 days in the house of the headman called Dekyilinga. We supplied the fodder for their horses. Altogether they came three times. When they came the last time, the People's Liberation Army had already arrived at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>. On the 22nd of probably the fourth month, the Khambas again left because they knew that the People's Liberation Army had come to Ramba. So they ran away and the situation calmed down. After that, I received a notice [from the Chinese in Ramba] about attending a meeting, but while all of the other names of the estates were written there, the name of the estate where I was staying and my name were not written. This letter was passed down to all the estates, and on the next day, the meeting was held in Ramba. I didn't have any experience regarding the revolution, but I had doubts and I thought that it was not alright if I didn't attend the meeting, so I went to the meeting. When I got there, they asked me, "Why are you here?" I said, "The other estates received a letter to attend the meeting, but my name wasn't on there. I was wondering whether this was just an omission so I came to ask about this." They told me to stay. The people involved in the revolt in the Ramba area were shut up in jail. Then they held meetings for a couple of days and served us food. One day, they [Chinese cadres] called me. There were two People's Liberation Army soldiers standing there. They said, "We will take over Lhalu's estates so you have to hand over the keys of the estates to us."   

**Q:**  Who was the interpreter?   

**A:**  There was an interpreter called Powo Kelsang [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་སྐལ་བཟང] and a Chinese chief of staff [Ch. can mou] called Wang. It was said that the interpreter used to be a monk in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> monastery.   

**Q:**  What was the rank of the military officer, was he a Company Leader [Ch. lian zhang] or a Battalion Leader [Ch. ying zhang]?   

**A:**  I have forgotten that.   

**Q:**  How many People's Liberation Army soldiers were there?   

**A:**  There were over 300 soldiers, and the leader of the artillery unit was wearing a black coat. I didn't know anything about quelling the revolt, so I said, "If I hand over the estates like this, I [first] have to hand over the accounting [Tib. རྩིས་རྒྱག] to Lhalu." They said, "Don't you know that Lhalu is a reactionary and has been imprisoned?" I said, "Anyway, I have to talk with Lhalu. Otherwise, if I hand over the estates like this, in the future they will make me become a beggar." They told me, "If you don't accept this, we will send you to China." I said, "I don't care. I will go to China." Then they said, "You will not meet your wife and children." I said, "There is nothing for me to do even if I will not meet them."   

**Q:**  Did they say that they were going to send you to jail in China?   

**A:**  They just said that they were going to send me to China. They didn't say any other things. I told them, "You can send me wherever you like to." They said, "Don't you have to go home?" I told them, "Since you are going to send me to China, I have no thoughts [Tib. བསམ་རྒྱུ་དྲན་རྒྱུ་མི་འདུག] so I just have to go wherever I will be sent." Then they asked me what I was going to do now. I told them, "Please give me a receipt. In the future, I can show this [to Lhalu]. If you give me a receipt, I will hand over the estates to you. Otherwise, I can't bear the responsibility for doing this." Then they said that they would give me a receipt, and they wrote the receipt or certificate and sealed it with many square shaped seals.   

**Q:**  Was it written in Tibetan?   

**A:**  No, it was Chinese.   

**Q:**  Didn't they translate the receipt?   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  What did they write in the receipt?   

**A:**  It was written, "We took over the keys of the estates that belonged to the reactionary Lhalu. The estate manager is not to be blamed. In the future, whatever comments there will be [about the estate], they should come to us and you are not allowed to cause trouble to him." The interpreter asked whether this was okay. I said, "This is okay because I will have something to show." Then they took all the keys of the estate and gave me a cigarette and told me to think about it. I said, I don't have anything to think about." They said, "Why?" I said, "I am in such a state of shock that I can't think straight, but I am also not afraid." They then told the soldiers who were carrying guns to go away and said, "Now it doesn't matter. You can take back the keys, they [the officials] will do something about this in the future." At that time, all the leaders [the estate managers] were called to the meeting and I was told to be a uyön (leader) of the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད; Ch. wei yuan]. They gave me a kind of title. During that period, they didn't shut me up in jail. Later, when I got close to the interpreter, he told me, "It was good that you came to the meeting even though you didn't receive the notice. Otherwise, we would have made you like the other people and shut you up in jail." Then they told me to go back [to the estate] and said they would come later.   

**Q:**  How long did they hold the meeting?   

**A:**  It was about eleven days. During that time it was like giving a party, using the things that they had confiscated.   

**Q:**  Did you have servants with you?   

**A:**  Yes, I had one servant.   

**Q:**  During that time, you didn't have any connections with your home, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They [he cadres] wanted me to hand over the documents distributed by the reactionaries so I sent my servants to get them. I told them [the Chinese] that I didn't have any choice but to do whatever the Khambas told me to do. After I went back hoome, the same group of fifteen Khambas came to my house again. They probably didn't find a place to run away to. I didn't keep them at home and I also didn't make any arrangements for them on the estate. I just left them in the headman's house and supplied them some fodder and I went there to see them.   

**Q:**  What did the Khambas say?   

**A:**  They told me, "You shouldn’t stay here. Let's go and run away to India. We will escort you." I told them that I couldn't run away because I had my wife and children. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> was a kind of humorous person and he told me to give him the woolen bedding. "They will take away all your things when they implement the reforms so it is useless to think about your wealth. You had better leave. As for us, the only way is to die." Some of them had five bullets and some of them had ten bullets. They said, "After the bullets run out, then we have to die." The Khambas stayed for about three to four days and then they left. The [Chinese] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> knew about that. After that, the Dzongpön of the Nyemo Mönkhar Dzong sent the estate manager of the Trekhang [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] estate, which belonged to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Labrang [Tib. སྟག་བྲག་བླ་བྲང], and told me to deliver 500 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley to Mönkhar Dzong. After that, I was called to another household where the interpreter and two officials came and said, "Where are the reactionaries?" I said, "There are no reactionaries here." Then they searched all the rooms in the house and the hay storeroom. The Khambas had left the day before. When they couldn't find anything, they calmed down and we served them noodles. They asked, "Where is the estate?" I said, "The estate is up there." Then the interpreter blew a whistle and many soldiers came down from the mountain and they told me to hand over the keys of the estate. That night I went to open the doors of the estate. I was very tired when they told me to carry down the carpets because I didn't have servants there. There were 350 People's Liberation Army soldiers there and they fetched water and boiled the water. On that day, they told me to call a meeting like the Khambas haad done and they [Chinese] told me at the meeting, "The Khambas have been here and there are people who had relations with them." They told me to go to the Khambas and tell them to surrender. If they surrender, they will be given the same status as they had before, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and gyagpön. They will not be imprisoned and killed." I said, "I don't dare to go there because they will kill me." They said, "They won't kill you because you were their friend." I said, "Now, there is no longer any friendship. In the past, at the beginning, they bullied us and then we got close with them. Now, the soldiers have arrived here. So they will kill me or take me away with them." When they told me to go with them, I refused to go. They [the Chinese] said, "They won't kill you. If they take you with them, go with them and one day we will get you." They gave me 200-300 for buying fodder for the horses and I took a servant and went to the Khambas. When I arrived at Tsurphu, the Khambas had left for Phembo [Tib. ཕེན་པོ] and I came back and told them that they had left. Then they brought two yaks from the herd and slaughtered them. The soldiers had only rice and salt. They were eating rice with salt in it.   

**Q:**  How long did it take for you to go to Tsurphu?   

**A:**  It took four days. I stayed overnight in Nyemo and then I crossed the mountain pass and came back. After that, the situation had kind of calmed down, and the soldiers went back and I was told to collect the weapons from all the estates. They said, "You are not allowed to take your servants because until now, you have been the head [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and you had servants in the past. Now you have to go alone." So I collected all the guns. They were mostly Tibetan [matchlock] guns and swords and spears. I made a list and took a kind of agreement and took these to Ramba.   

**Q:**  How many Tibetan guns were there?   

**A:**  There were about 200 guns and about 8,000 swords and daggers. I put all the documents in a trunk. I asked them [the Chinese] to give me a receipt for the weapons. They said, "You don't need receipts because we are working together." After that, the soldiers took me together with 75 cavalry. We went day and night to wherever they received a phone call telling them where the Khambas would be.   

**Q:**  Where did you go?   

**A:**  It was in the Paldi and Yagde areas. We also went to Nangkartse when we heard that there were Khambas in that place, but then come back at night. Finally, we heard that there were Khambas on the mountain pass called Drelhe [Tib. འདྲེ་ལྷད] and I went there with the People's Liberation Army soldiers. The Khambas were shooting at us and the soldiers also shot at them many times. After that, they {Khambas] ran away and disappeared.   

**Q:**  Did any soldiers die?   

**A:**  No, but there were casualties on both sides. Then I heard that the Khambas ran away with their guns, but had left their horses and food over there. After that, in the fourth Tibetan month, s Work Team [Tib. ལས་དོན་རུ་ཁག] came to Nyemo and all of the estate mangers were called to a study session. They were not prisoners. Altogether there were 140 people. When the meetings [study sessions] were held, the officials came to the meeting. Normally, the leader was a Chinese Director called Song Zhuren. She was about 17-18 years old with long hair. Now, she has retired. There was also the Chinese cadre called Shucai. They were the leaders of the study session during the daytime. At night, they handed them over to me. People from Nyemo used to go home at night and I just let them go and told them to come back early in the morning. I treated them leniently and they also were able to drink beer.   

