# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0007.04 : Tape 4  
##  : (Litang) Athar, Ngawang Norbu [Tib. (ལི་ཐང) ཨ་ཐར་ངག་དབང་ནོར་བུ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:**  (Litang) Athar, Ngawang Norbu [Tib. (ལི་ཐང) ཨ་ཐར་ངག་དབང་ནོར་བུ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 62  
**Date of Birth:** 1931  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Norbu [Tib. ངག་དབང་ནོར་བུ], also known as Litang Athar [Tib. ལི་ཐང་ཨ་ཐར], was a monk and trader in Bö. He was part of the first group of six Khambas taken from Kalimpong to Saipan in 1957 by the CIA for training. He was parachuted into Central Tibet in October 1957 to make contact for the Americans with Phala and the Dalai Lama. In this interview, he discusses various interactions with Chushigandru, as well as interactions between Alo Chöndze and the Tibetan government's Finance Office. He also describes his own thoughts on the Chinese Communists' strategy.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0007_04/H_0007_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  [CONTINUED FROM H.0007.03] (How did you measure the wind?)   

**A:**  You can tell more or less. You can throw a feather into the wind and see how far it goes in so many seconds. How far the enemy lines are, how dangerous it is, from which direction the plane should come from, from which direction the wind is blowing and in which direction should the plane take off from. Are there hills in the take off direction? The plane has to be lower in altitude when the drop is made and so are there obstacles or not? All of these things we were trained in and must know. So it was not easy. For example, what would have happened if the Chinese started firing before we had even unloaded the goods? Such dangers could have arisen. So we had to see how far the enemy lines were, and in case the Chinese did come, then could we still drop and make off with the goods within a specified time? Then the place where the drop was made, one had to indicate how the situation was if goods were dropped—or if people were dropped—or if the plane should land. So we gave all the signals.   

**Q:**  Now, after you were dropped, as you mentioned last time, in Okinawa, you were told to get in touch with Phala and Gombo Tashi. At that time, you met Andru Gombo Tashi. What did you talk about?   

**A:**  We knew each other. So he knew where we went and what for. He knows the whole story. He knows that we went for training. After we were parachuted, for a month and about 18-19 days, we did not go and meet him. We did not meet anyone. The reason being that they may have heard the drone of the plane, and if somebody did come to look for us, there was some danger. Then there were people from our country who knew us and who knew that we went abroad [in Lhasa]. For this reason, we hung around the villages and isolated areas. Then after a month and about 18 days, we contacted Gombo Tashi and sent a message. We had some friends whom we sent. Then we agreed to meet.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  The first one was at Sangwe Tsachuka [Tib. གསང་བའི་ཚ་ཆུ་ཁ], I think. On the side of Lhasa, there is the Sangwe Tsachuka.   

**Q:**  Is it Samye?   

**A:**  No, it's called Sangwe Tsachuka. The reason for that name is that it is told that earlier, Songtsen Gambo's minister, Garwa, secretly hid the Gyasa [Princess Wengchen] in that place. And there is a nunnery. The place is at a foothill. I think we met around there, but I don't remember everything because we met at so many places.   

**Q:**  This was the first meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. It's hard to remember all since we met many times. Then we used to send signals saying to come and meet. We had some way of indicating [this] by hoisting prayer flags.   

**Q:**  When you first met, what was the talk about?   

**A:**  That we had come and so what was his plan and what should we do. What else is there to say besides that, right? That we had arrived from our training and that was what they were saying, so now what shall we do? We must have said, "Let's see what can be done," because we could not have immediately had a plan.   

**Q:**  Originally, 27 people came to Kalimpong. Now, regarding all that happened there, that you met Gyalo Thondup, etcetera, etcetera, did you send messages to Andru Jinda about these things happening?   

**A:**  He knows everything. We had many companions who returned. A group of our companions could not go for training and so they returned. They must have said, "Some went somewhere. We don't know where. We were not accepted and so we returned." They must have said something like that. So they were saying that and Gyalo Thondup must have also been telling . Even we received a letter at Guam [Saipan] while we were training. Gombo Tashi wrote saying, "You guys train well and we are forming an organization." So this means he knew about it.   

**Q:**  How was the relationship between Jenkhentsisum in Kalimpong, [and] Phala Drönyerchemmo and Chushigandru?   

**A:**  I think they had relations and they must have been sending messengers to each other. At that time, whoever wanted to go could do so. There were traders going, muleteers, and messengers could be sent. So every few days, they could send information. If one rode a horse from Kalimpong to Lhasa very fast, one could probably get there in about six days. From Kalimpong to Dzalep-la, then [to] Richengang, Phari, Düna [Tib. དུས་སྣ], Khangmar [Tib. ཁང་དམར], Ralung, Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ], Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར]. So in about seven days. I had a companion from Tibet, [and] a relative of my companion [Lhotse's relative]. Then there was a person who went to America earlier for training. He could not go and he was left behind. His name was Gaten [Tib. དགའ་བསྟན]. The two were to be taught how to take pictures since it seemed they needed to send a lot of pictures. I don't know whether Gyalo Thondup taught [them] or [if] Yabshi Trunyila or Chanju Jimpa (I used to know him. He is Trunyila's nephew but he died) [did]. So I took him with me. So I guess you are talking about this. He could not go with us. We had a shoot-out with the Chinese at Sharsingma and so we had to run to this side, right? So he was left at Kalimpong. [We] stayed at Darjeeling and once again, [we] went to the States for training and then later returned.   

**Q:**  A relative who came to see him was shot dead, right?   

**A:**  We went together, right? And when we did [go] to Sharsingma, we had a shoot-out with the Chinese and he was killed.   

**Q:**  You mentioned this briefly. When you went via Bhutan, you met Sandu Lonyendra, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [We] met Sandu Lonyendra. He was returning and we met him at Paro, Bhutan.   

**Q:**  How was Sandu Lonyendra concerned with the Chushigandru?   

**A:**  Actually, he is a Tiu Khamba from Targye Gomba. But, Sandutsang had a lot of people so when he prepared for war , they became like an eating commune, tobtsang. And there was a group called Sandu Shoka. Their group had about 30-40 riders.   

**Q:**  Were they doing things together or were they separate?   

**A:**  We were all together. Under Chushigandru we were all the same. Our Chushigandru was organized into various groups, named alphabetically like Kadang, Chadang, etcetera. Like the Tibetan Government's Army. Our Litangba unit was Jadang. We had about 500 soldiers in a battalion or rushog [Tib. རུ་ཤོག]. Some had 100, or 200, 300. But if a rushog could not form, then it would become part of another. For example, if it was said that from each rushog, one person had to come, if one's group was small, then you could say you couldn't manage and they would be joined with another. The Bhutanese sold Sandu Lo Nyendra 10 or 20 303 rifles. He said he bought them. You know Kumar Sahib [Jigme Dorje], the husband of one of your sisters?   

**Q:**  Yes, my father's sister, Tess la.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. Lo Nyendra was friendly with him and so he sold them [to him]. It is said that they were given or sold. Maybe it was just said that they were sold but [they were] actually given. Whatever it is, he was given 10-20 303 rifles. I don't remember the numbers exactly. I think it was 10, 10-15, along with the bullets.   

**Q:**  He got them?   

**A:**  The Bhutanese gave him [them]. He said he paid for them.   

**Q:**  You could not go via Sharsingma and so you went via Bhutan, right?   

**A:**  I couldn't go through Sharsingma and came down to Darjeeling. So Gyalo Thondup asked Trashö Rani for permission to go via Bhutan and I went.   

**Q:**  From Bhutan where did you go? You said you went to Bhutan and here. I did not understand [this] very well. You said that your friend sent a wireless [message] and I think it had something to do with a drop.   

**A:**  Oh, it must be this. When I got to Bhutan, a plane had come to them. My companion got a weapon drop.   

**Q:**  Where was he?   

**A:**  He was at Lhoka. When I came [to] this side, he stayed, right? When he was at Lhoka, he needed arms to protect the wireless communication. Whatever arms there were went with the Chushigandru who went to fight in the north. He did not have many arms. He had sent a wireless [message] saying "Please send some arms," and the Americans dropped arms for one company. I saw it when I got there.   

**Q:**  How many were in one company?   

**A:**  140, and some had 145-150 also.   

**Q:**  Wasn't this the second drop?   

**A:**  It was the first. The first drop was when we were parachuted. This was the first arms drop.   

**Q:**  So it was the first arms drop?   

**A:**  Yes, the first. The reason is that I got to Calcutta and they agreed to help and to drop whatever arms we needed. This they accepted. After this, when I went to Sharsingma and got into trouble and returned and once again went via the Bhutanese border, it was during this time that my companion sent a wireless requesting arms since he did not have any. So the Americans sent arms for one company. This was for his protection.   

**Q:**  Before the Dalai Lama came to in 1959, how many arms were dropped?   

**A:**  There was another drop when I got there.   

**Q:**  After traveling via Bhutan?   

**A:**  Yes. It was just before the Dalai Lama escaped.   

**Q:**  Where was it dropped?   

**A:**  There was a plain, you could call it Drigutang. It was adjacent to Drigutang. I don't know the name of the plain. All the arms were used to accompany the Dalai Lama. I think I brought 170 soldiers. The two of us brought 170 soldiers and accompanied the Dalai Lama to the border. About 300 riders accompanied the Dalai Lama to the border, right? All the arms were sent for this purpose because if the Chinese gave chase, then these were good arms. We mainly had a lot of bullets. For each gun I gave 300 bullets each. The two of us brought the two cannons. There were a few who knew how to fire them. Then we had 3 machine guns and we got all of that prepared. We were concerned that the Chinese would be giving chase. So before I gave the arms to the Chushigandru fighters, I used them to accompany the Dalai Lama. After accompanying the Dalai Lama, then I sent all the people with the arms to the regiment [Chushigandru].   

**Q:**  This was the time when the Dalai Lama was escaping. You said that Surkhang Wangchen Gelek, Chemmo, and Namseling were with the Chushigandru and it seemed that Chushigandru and the kudrak had some problem.   

**A:**  It was not like that. Namseling had the problem with Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  What was the problem?   

**A:**  Since Namseling was a government official—earlier, also, Namseling and Andru Gombo Tashi were very friendly and he was thinking that he was something great [Tib. ཞེད་པོ་ཅིག་ཡིན་བསམ]. What should I say? From the government officials, they were against the Chinese, and so it seems that he was sort of a Chinese target. On account of something like that, he came to Lhoka and had a lot of plans, saying that one should do this and that. So it seems that he said that all the Chushigandru soldiers should go to the north and fight. He had plans for government soldiers from the regiments like Gadang, who it seemed had gotten leave, and along with them, he was going to organize militiamen and guard Lhoka. Chushigandru did not agree with that. Chushigandru had gone to the north with Andru Gombo Tashi, and they had fought the Chinese there and had a very difficult time, and they couldn't get back. So they said, "What are you saying? Telling us to go to the north. You have the Chinese aims [Tib. དམིགས་ཡུལ]. Gombo Tashi and all went to the north and Gombo Tashi has not been able to return, and a lot of the Chushigandru are still left there. So what is this about going to the North? This is not appropriate. What are you talking about, saying that the Lhoka area should [be] left empty?" It was regarding this. And Namseling, since he was a government official, he thought of making himself have greater power, and it seems that Chushigandru did not agree with him. If he had done things honestly, then I think some of the Chushigandru would have probably listened to him. At Chongye Riu Dechen, when the Dalai Lama was arriving, it seems that they had some disagreements and reported that Namseling was not doing very well. I don't think they told the Dalai Lama, but they may have told Phala and the Kashag. So Phala and Surkhang stayed behind to discuss some of these things. When I met the Dalai Lama, Phala and Surkhang and the like were not there. So I waited and they came later. Something like that happened. Some disagreements, but nothing much.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that Namseling and Samjola were trying to recruit a lot of people from the various dzongs or something, whether it was to fight or something. Then it was said that they were trying to organize food from the various dzongs. That they discussed with the various dzongs and the tsodrag, something like that.   

**A:**  It was like this. Samjola and Namseling were sent by the Chinese to ask the Chushigandru to hand in their arms and surrender. Chushigandru said that they were not going to hand in their arms and surrender. So Namseling and Samjola feared to return back to the Chinese. It seems that Samjola and Namseling generally disliked the Chinese. So they didn't dare to return.   

**Q:**  Did they fear to return or did Chushigandru say that they would not allow them to leave?   

**A:**  They did not return. Their companions returned and so why should Chushigandru stop them? The question of not letting our own people did not arise. They came to request [for a] surrender, to hand in arms and that the government was going to [give a] guarantee, etcetera. Nobody was going to listen to that, right? So they felt uncomfortable to return. Some of the kudrak returned. They stayed. Samjola and some others came to Lhüntse Dzong, I remember. It is as I have been saying about recruiting the [militia] called Gadang and Chadang . They had a lot of plans. But before they could put them into effect, the Dalai Lama had to escape. So everyone was just leaving and nothing was accomplished. . I don't think they had evil designs [intentions]. They probably hoped that something could be done in the north. It was good that we did not go to the north because when the Dalai Lama escaped, it would have been very difficult. If everyone was in the north, including arms and ammunition, then—for example, it is said that just Tsetang had 1,500 or a few thousand Chinese soldiers. What I know is that there were more than a thousand. This the Chushigandru stopped and [they] did not allow them to advance when the Dalai Lama was coming. If this was more than a thousand [and they] had advanced, they could easily have come. The Dalai Lama had to travel this way and their military camp was nearby. If they advanced, the Dalai Lama could not have come easily. This the Chushigandru did right. Some of the deities made excellent prophecies. I think some of the deities were marvelous. When asked whether to fight or not, they said, "Fight and guard the place [Tib. ས་སྲུང]." So when the Dalai Lama was coming, we were guarding the place. The leaders were the ones at Dehradun. You know Radrü Ngawang? Yes, like him. Ngawang was one of the main commanders at Tsetang. When the Dalai Lama came, they had encircled them. If these soldiers advanced, then there were more than a thousand and it would not have been easy to manage them. That's what happened and when the Dalai Lama was coming via this route, there was no resistance and he was able to come swiftly. Lhoka was clean . These are sort of the true facts.   

**Q:**  I'm not sure that I heard correctly on the tape, but there is this place called Yu Chundodzong.   

**A:**  It is E Chundogyang. Yes, I think that's it.   

**Q:**  Where is that?   

**A:**  Let me see. E Chundogyang is on the other side of the Yartö Tragla. It's on this side of the Yartö Tragla. At the foot of the pass.   

**Q:**  When you were at Lhüntse Dzong, there was a message saying that they had contacted the Indian government and so it was alright for the Dalai Lama to go to India. Did you send [question not finished]...   

**A:**  It was not at Lhüntse Dzong. We sent the wireless from Lhüntse Dzong asking them to contact the Indian government. Then via the land route, we sent messengers. Gyalo Thondup had sent two persons, Changjub Jimpa and Jangra Lekshey. They had Indian passes and they were sent from Mön Tawang. So we sent the two down asking them to send a message to the Indian government via the border check post. We asked the Americans to speak with the Indian government, whether they had to speak with Gyalo Thondup or whomever. The Americans agreed to do so. Now, the reply to that message arrived when we were at the border, at this place called Mamapur. We waited for the reply and the Dalai Lama stayed one day at the border, and audiences were given. That evening, the message arrived and I informed Phala Drönyerchemmo of it, and [it] said, "You can now leave. The Indian government said okay." Now I don't know who discussed —whether it was the Americans or Gyalo Thondup.   

**Q:**  You received a wire[less message], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It was the usual U.S. wireless, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. There was nothing but that. The message arrived at Mamapur. I don't remember the date. It's too bad, but we burned the message right away. It is the policy of intelligence that one is not permitted to keep the messages.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was coming, you met him at Lhüntse Dzong or somewhere, right?   

**A:**  The two of us?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  At first we met the Dalai Lama at Chundogyang. The second was at Mamapur.   

**Q:**  You said you received an image, right?   

**A:**  No, it was this rosary [Tib. ཕྱག་ཕྲེང]. It is said [to have] belonged to many previous Dalai Lamas. I don't know how we Tibetans got it but it's considered as a sort of protective talisman [Tib. མཚོན་སྲུང]. I got one bead of the rosary, my companion got one and Gombo Tashi another. At that time, there was only that much of the rosary left . The Dalai Lama had given them [beads] and it was almost finished. Then I got a Jigje Mahe talisman. I have that in my amulet presently. All the things the Dalai Lama gave me, I have them here somewhere.   

**Q:**  Yes. I wanted to ask about the rosary, and since we are young we don't know.   

**A:**  Yes, then a Jigje Mahe, which is a sort of protective talisman. He gave [us] those.   

**Q:**  Either in Litang or in Kham, Gyado Wangdü, his servant and Tsewang Dorje were dropped, right? What happened to them later?   

**A:**  Tsewang Dorje was killed there. So was his servant Bhulü. Wangdü managed to escape. In 1958, when the two of us were at Lhoka, he came there. Tashi was sent via land. Jangra Tashi, who on the plane [answer not finished]...   

**Q:**  Too little oxygen?   

**A:**  Yes, too little oxygen . He was sent via the land route and arrived at his homeland, and he too was killed. It is said that he was killed at a water mill. Poor guy, [he] later fought and didn't find food to eat and kept going. He went to the place of a friend and there the Chinese caught up with him. He fought from within the water mill and was killed there.   

**Q:**  I still have a little bit, you know.   

**A:**  Yes, let's hear it all.   

**Q:**  I'm not keeping you from your work?   

**A:**  Now, I think you should say all you have [to]. I think it's better we finish it.   

**Q:**  Alright. In Litang, you said that you had 600 miser, right?   

**A:**  Correct.   

**Q:**  What kind of place is Litang. Was it mostly agropastoral or nomadic, or agricultural? What was the economy like? The monasteries? The various grouping of nomads? The various pön?   

**A:**  Now, I told you about the Litang story, and about Alo Chöndze. The Litang area was at one time a Tibetan government dzong where a lay and monk official ruled. The Tibetan government used to send one lay and one monk official to Litang Dzong. There seemed to be a custom for sending [two officials] also to Ba. So during the Tibetan government period, they used to send two officials to each . Litang is what we call the Lide Ngari Shingkham [Tib. ལི་སྡེ་མགའ་རིས་ཤིང་ཁམ]. Litang had eight big groups and 16 small groups, tshogchung. I think each big group used to be considered [made up of] 1,000 villages (Tib. tongdey [Tib. སྟོང་སྡེ]). The 16 small groups were, it seemed, composed of various numbers. Anywhere from 200-500 villages. So all the Litang misers were part of the eight shogchen and the 16 tshogchung. In this there were also five tongdey of nomads . During the time of the Tibetan government, it was called the five pönkhag of gaa. Among the five there were the two, Yönru and Uthog [Tib. དབུ་ཐོག], and one called De gongma [Tib. སྡེ་གོང་མ], which makes three. Golok was the fourth. Bangshölpa made the fifth. Bangshölpa, it seems, were the misers of Tsekhag Dzong [Tib. རྩེ་ཁག], the one under a tsidrung. Golok seemed to be under a lay official. So these two did not have any special pön because they were under the Drung Depa [Tib. དྲུང་སྡེ་པ], the lay official, and the Tsekhag Depa [Tib. རྩེ་ཁག་སྡེ་པ], the monk official. Uthog had their own pön and Yönru also had their own. The one that you mentioned regarding Alo Chöndze, De gongma, also had their own leaders. Later, when the Tibetan government lost their power to the Guomindang, only the dzong were left. So the misers from these two areas were looked after by Degötsang [Tib.?], someone by the name of Degö Tapo [Tib.?]. He was from a Tibetan government lay official but—and since he had no power, all the misers scattered. The nomads went to the Uthog, De Gongma and Yönru. So [people from] Bangshölpa and Golok were scattered. The reason being that when the Tibetan government lost, there was nobody to look after them. So each one went under various other pönkhag. So now they were all under the three shogchen and there were three nomad tongdey villages. They still hold on to their names, Golok and Bangshölpa, but they went under the other pön. The five Gar pönkhag are known as the five tongdey. Then among the Litang miser, first there is Tsosangmola [Tib. ?], which consists of two villages. Then there is Menashisum: Mewa, Nabo, and Shibo [Tib.?]. Rong Nyagö Chögye [Tib.?], which has eight shoga [groups]. Then there was Junkaghasum; Gyawa, Shaba, Jubasang [Tib. ?]—there were 16 of these. Then Golok [Tib. མགོ་ལོག], not the big one but Litang Golok which had about 200-300 misers. Then there was Rawa [Tib. དབྲ་བ], Radrü Ngawang's homeland and them. It's called Ragye Shogdrub. Rawa, Khozewa and Shogdrub [Tib.?] makes three. These are the 16 tshogchung. So the main monastery of all is Litang Gomba. There are so many smaller monasteries in the various places with anywhere from 50-300 monks. The largest is Litang Monastery and it has 5,700 monks. The size and the number of monks are exactly the same as Sera. It's a very big monastery. All the various places have many pönkhag (chiefs), but Litang Monastery leads them all. In the monastery, there are four chabu and one drönyerchemmo, making a total of five. The Litang Abbot is a lama and does not interfere politically. Under him, are the five chandrön. They make the decisions. If there are fights between two villages, the monastery will solve them. As for the overall leader in the monastery, during the time of the Guomindang, they didn't do much and so the monastery was the main power. Earlier when the Tibetan government was looking after the place, they were very powerful. After that, it was Litang Monastery. During the time of the Guomindang, they destroyed the monastery twice. It seems that the monastery was not listening to the Guomindang and they took the abbot of the monastery called Ngagchen Rechungba [Tib. སྔགས་ཆེན་རས་བྱུང་པ྄] and decapitated him. They decapitated seven lamas and monks. The Guomindang times were bad. We Tibetans have always suffered. Litang was a very happy place with both nomads and agriculturists. I have a cassette here. They do not show the agriculturists, only nomads. The one who took the video is a Chinese cadre . He had shots of the Yönru nomads and a few of the places, the horse races and the monastery. The old monastery was destroyed, but they built a new one. He sent it last year. It was for the occasion of 1991, the celebration of the forty years since they took over [ate] Tibet. This is Litang. The reason why we were able to fight was that the people were under the monastery and the monasteries hated the Communists. It is thanks to the monastery that we were able to put up a strong fight. It was not possible for one pönkhag to fight, right? He would only have [had] about 1,000 misers, or at the most 2-3,000. That was all. So when the monastery fought, where did the monks come from? They came from the various villages and from the 5,000 nomads units, and who knows how many villagers. When they fought, it was not possible for the villagers to stand still, right? That was how the battle was fought—based on such an organization. And likewise, they fought at Chantreng, Baba, Lakashiba [Tib.?] Nyarong and almost everywhere in Kham. However, we were not able to fight as one unit. For example, we were not able to all gather around one pönbo (chief) and fight as an organization. What was especially different about Chushigandru was that in Lhasa, all the various traders from Kham, from 33 groups, they were able to come together and fight. So this was a united fight. This was something different about Chushigandru. Other than that, if one counts the number of casualties on both sides, then, if the Chushigandru killed one, then in our country, we had killed one hundred. The casualties on both sides were higher in our country. At first, we just spent time fighting in our country and we were not able to unite. Chushigandru united all the traders at Lhasa and fought. They were strong and had a big name. Then they sort of brought the Dalai Lama out and got in touch with the Americans. So they sort of had a big name. But the real fight was in our country. It started in 1956 and even by 1960 they had not put us down. We fought for five years. We Chushigandru fought for only two years . We made the organization in 1957 but we were not even able to fight properly for two years. In our country, we fought for five to six years. The last guerilla groups of 10 to 30 persons feared surrendering and they were still roaming the hills in the 1970's. Litang was like that.   

**Q:**  Among the Khambas, there seemed to be many Litangba who were rebelling, like Alo Chöndze, Andru Gombo Tashi and you guys. Was there any special reason?   

**A:**  As I look at it, the reason seems to be that at first, the Chinese fought in our country. The liberation was coming from down there, from the Chinese border. Minyag was liberated. Poor Minyag people. Their country was beautiful, but they were not strongly organized and they didn't have much power. They could not organize under one leader, so they could not do much.   

**Q:**  Were their pön small or [question not finished]...   

**A:**  There were just some small pön. They did not have strong pön. As soon as you pass Minyag, it's our country and so the liberation came to us, but they met stiff resistance from the monastery, which did not like the Chinese. The monastery was the main leader. And usually it is said of Litang, "Litang is a place of thieves, but don't say that because it is the place where the Dalai Lama was born [Tib. ལི་འགོ་རིམ་པ་ལི་ཐང་རྐུན་མའི་ས་ཆ་རེད། ཞུ་མེ་ཉན་སྐྱབས་མགོན་འཁྲུང་ས་རེད]." So since the old days, Litang's specialty was fighting and robbing. Everyone was show-offish, or what should I say, it was their habit. Even during the Guomindang, they could not manage us and so they used to treat us diplomatically and leniently. They could not easily kill and cut us down. We fought with the Chinese like Taochai, Qingchai and the Ambans . It seems Chinese leaders used to come with one or two thousand [soldiers]. We fought all of them here and there. Guys like Taochai burned our monasteries and did all kinds of things. Took our lamas. Qingchai and Taochai seemed to be of some Chinese ranking. They cut our lamas' necks and cut the necks of seven lamas and monks, and all kinds of things. So it seems that the people were tough. Later, when the war started, we could not remain, and as I mentioned to you last time, Litang Monastery sent messengers to Lhasa. The message said that all our Litang traders did not just stay in Lhasa and letters were sent to Sendregasum, to the Tibetan government and all our traders. The letter said, "If you guys are busily trading, your country has been attacked by the Chinese and all the monks have become soldiers. There is no place to return home to. Even if you have money, it won't help. Our monastery chabu in Lhasa has more than 100 boxes [1,000 dayan in each box] of dayan. Take that and use that as capital, and go to some foreign country or somewhere and look for help. Approach the Tibetan government and give them the money and request for arms. Later, when things become better, we will repay 10 yuan for your one yuan." So we sent such letters. But we were not allowed to remain in Lhasa and we did not leave Gombo Tashi alone and said, "Gombo Tashi, please do something." The messengers from Litang used to come to Gombo Tashi. He had a big name and from among our traders, he was one of the biggest. Earlier, even in our whole snowland Tibet, Andrutsang was the one who first left the endowment [Tib. ཐེབས་རྩ] for the three great monasteries. Andru Gyentsen [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན] was the one who first left the endowment. The Tibetan government gave a title to Andru Garpön. It seems that Andrutsang was the one to whom the various traders used to go to if they had some problems. If they could not sell or buy, they asked Andrutsang to please sell or buy [the goods]. So from way back, we all knew Andrutsang, right? So from home, they asked Andrutsang to lead and he made the move.   

**Q:**  Then there was this the Tibetan government pönbo, Noko Dojang.   

**A:**  Dojang was a pönbo (chief) in our country.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Earlier, at the time of the Water Mouse Chinese War [Tib. ཆུ་བྱི་རྒྱ་དམག], his great grandfather served the Tibetan government very well and they received the fourth rank. Among the Tibetan government, this is a higher rank. It was at the time the Tibetan government sent their army to Kham. Shall we get ready for lunch? [TN note: It seems some part is missing here in the beginning of side B.] Until that time, the Chinese did not do anything and they told us Tibetans that for five years, it was sort of a lenient policy [Tib. སྲིད་ཇུས་གུ་ཡངས]. So they did not do anything. They left their army there and went up and down. Then their administration, what should I say, the civil leader, maybe he was a commissioner of sorts, came to Litang and in Litang, they started educating [us] in the communist system. that the communist system was good, that starting socialism was good, and coached so many things like that. Many of them came to teach these things. [They said] that this is good and that is good. They used to go among the "beggars" [not necessarily beggars, I think but the poor, beggars, drifters, riff-raff] and advise them, and had big meetings and said that communism and socialism are good. That the landlords [Tib. ས་བདག] and the rich farmers, something must be destroyed. So they kept saying these things. The actual practice was that they were saying that they were going to hold a "study session [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱིང]", and they took the pön to China and gave [them] titles, went down to Pejing and they were taken everywhere.   

**Q:**  I see, the pönbo were taken down?   

**A:**  Yes, they were, and many went down and they gave out many titles. They gave them a salary and ranks. Yönrupön was given a salary and a rank, but he said, "I don't want a salary and I don't want a rank," and never accepted it. He was a little bit shrewd and kept on doing that to the end. Later, the monastery and those people told him that for the time being, it was better for the monastery and all to be diplomatic. So as his representative, he sent one of his ministers, lönbo, and there was a meeting with the Chinese. The representative's name was Khaku [Tib.?] Sonam Rinchen [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རིན་ཆེན]. I remember that since we used to somewhat know each other. Yönrupön himself never went to any Chinese meetings. When they gave money, he said, "Ever since I was young, I have never had any salary from the Guomindang, and even now I don't want any pay. I can fill my stomach from my own country." There are many stories of how he did not take pay. Finally, when the Dalai Lama went to Chengdu then China, and when he was returning, I heard that he did ask. He told the Dalai Lama, "Just now the Chinese are giving me rank and all. Until now I have not accepted [this]. What should I do?" The Dalai Lama told him to be diplomatic [Tib. མཁས་པོ་བྱེད]. Anyway, there was no time for any diplomacy. As soon as the Dalai Lama went to Ü, the fight started. As soon as the Dalai Lama left, in Lhasa, the Tibet Autonomous Region started. What's it called?   

**Q:**  The Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**A:**  Yes. In our country, then they were really actually making the real reforms. And since we did not agree, the fighting started. So there was no time to wait and see.   

**Q:**  Earlier, we were saying that from the time the Chinese first arrived until the time of the big meeting, what reforms had taken place. Then there were talks about land reforms. Was the land reform done?   

**A:**  It was this way. When they said that they were going to do reforms—and in order to do that, they had to do something at the various households, right? When they went to do that and if problems arose, then the households were armed. So there was danger that fighting might break out. So they said that they were going to make reforms and that no one was allowed to keep any guns and ammunition, and that they all had to be handed in. Then the problem arose as to whether to give or not to give [the guns and ammunition]. Once they were given, then it was all finished. It's the same as cutting the hands. All that was left was to put one's hand into the air. That's it, they said to hand in the arms. In the meantime, what happened was that they wanted to make the beggars hold the study session [Ch. xue xi] or something, and coached them. That if socialist reforms were made, then [answer not finished]...   

**Q:**  Xuexi is Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, it means study. They were teaching them about the communist policy.   

**Q:**  So they were gathering some people together?   

**A:**  Yes, they did that. For instance, they first got all of the beggars together. Mostly they started with the beggars. They gave them money and told them that they had been exploited by the rich and that they didn't have to take that any longer. That the wealth of the rich would be equally distributed. They told them various things. Then they did a lot of that and were still continuing. However, if they taught the beggars, they were not easily going to be able to reform the misers of the country, right? Actually, once they had taken up all the arms and ammunition, then they would arm the beggars and begin guerrilla warfare, who were, in turn, supported by the [People's Liberation Army] soldiers. Then they would fix up the elites, right? A job that they did not want to do but were making our people do. This was what they were starting in Litang. And they said to hand in the guns. That's how it actually sparked off. To that, we said, "We are not going to hand in arms and ammunition. It is something that we ourselves have paid for. Until now, no one has come to collect arms, and even now we are not going to hand them in. And this thing about democratic reforms, we are not going to do [them]." What the monks were saying, "We Litangba, leave aside the question of making decisions for the entire region of Litang [Tib. ལི་སྡེ་མངའ་རིས་ཤིང་ཁང] and the two monasteries, I can't even decide things in my own monks' quarters." So they said they would not accept [that] and that was the breaking point.   

**Q:**  What did they say about religion?   

**A:**  Regarding religion, they were just going through the motions of saying that there was such a thing as freedom of religion. It was something pleasant sounding. They said that it was our wish whether we wanted to say our mantras [Tib. མ་ནི] or not. But gathering for the prayer assembly [Tib. ཚོགས] was not good. For example, they said that it was useless to offer butter lamps. This was not allowed for it harms the economy of the country. There was no use for making tsamba dough offerings and torma, and monks staying at monasteries without working was unreasonable. But you could say your prayers if you wanted. You could say them at home or in the temple, but they were not going to allow the prayer assemblies. So how did they consider that there was freedom of religion? Because individually you could do what you liked, but you could not congregate for the tshog and take money from others. They were saying that the monks could not stay without working. Monks were only eating and staying [in the monastery].   

**Q:**  There was this meeting in Litang, right? Who is living now who was at that meeting and are there others who had lived in Litang for a long time? If I want to ask more in detail.   

**A:**  As I see it, there is no one around here who was at that meeting, I doubt it.   

**Q:**  No one?   

**A:**  No. No one came. Earlier there were two people. Two or three who had problems with Alo Chöndze. But now they are dead. All the elderly ones are all dead. The people who were at the meeting were the Litang Monastery's chandrön. I don't know how many, but on that day, probably two or three. Along with that were the 18 getsang from the 18 khamtsens, 18 monks. Then the leaders, pönbo, and representatives from various regions, they were there.   

**Q:**  If I want to ask about Litang or Chushigandru, who is there now in India? Some elderly Litang who are in their seventies. Ones who were not at Lhasa but were there at that time. Ones who stayed there from 1950-56 permanently?   

**A:**  Oh, let me see. Now if you wanted to ask, even if you did, there is no one who can tell you properly. They are all dead. Earlier we had two or three good people, but they died. Now, who is there? Let me see.   

**Q:**  The reason I wanted to ask you this is because I need to know in detail [about] what happened when the Chinese came. Someone who was there from '50-56.   

**A:**  Now, for example, I was there around my country until 1955.   

**Q:**  I see you were there.   

**A:**  Yes, but I was travelling up and down. I left in the 11th month of 1955.   

**Q:**  I see, I thought around 1950 you were trading in India and [question not finished]...   

**A:**  Yes, I came up and then went down. In 1950. In '54, I went down. In '55, when the Dalai Lama was there, I was too. As I look at it, the story of what the Chinese did is pretty much the same everywhere. In Litang, when they said that they were going to do democratic reforms, it was in 1955 that they had made the people hold the study session and in 1956, they were saying that they were going to start [the reforms]. So when the time came to start it, the fighting broke out. That's it. When they said that they were going to make democratic reforms, that's when the fight began.   

**Q:**  In '56, they were saying that they were going to make them [the reforms]?   

**A:**  Yes, they said that they were going to start and then they said to hand in arms and ammunition. When they said that, then the fight broke out. This was in the 12th month, [when] the meeting began. The fight broke out on the second or third day of the Tibetan New Year. Something like that.   

**Q:**  Later, when the Chinese came to Lhasa, they were showing their good side and being very diplomatic. Many seem to have thought, "Oh. Maybe it's not so bad, maybe we can work with them."   

**A:**  As I see it, I don't think the Tibetans ever trusted the Chinese. What happened was that our local Tibetan government in the Tibet Autonomous Region, I mean the Tibetan government, did not have the means, to tell you the truth. There was no way of being strong and to stand upright and challenge the Communists. That was one reason. Secondly, in the Tibetan government, there were various kudrak [read: officials] who were stronger, more powerful and wealthier than others, and so some were at a disadvantage and some had privileges. Those who did not have power, if they could somehow be kind of spiteful to the powerful, then they seemed [to be] sort of happy doing it. I think there was a lot of that in [Tibetan] government politics. Among the misers, those who did not have much and were poor, the Chinese gave them things to eat and drink [money] and said sweet things. So there may have been one or two [who liked the Chinese], but most knew what the Chinese were up to. For example, they knew that Communism does not like Buddhism, that they wanted to destroy the Tibetan culture. This was what the Chinese themselves were saying all the time. For example, what did they want to do after the peaceful liberation? They wanted to make changes. What changes? They wanted to change the policy. What we had now, they wanted to destroy. When they wanted to do this, some were not going to be happy. Isn’t that [how it would be]? Some, the beggars and others, thought that with the reform, the wealth of the rich would be given to them. That's what the Communists were saying. Later, when they reformed everything, when the Lhasa kudrak were all done away with, the Communists were communists and they got all the beggars and took them, and they gave them the satin dresses of the kudrak. They had the people put them on. But such dresses were absolutely no use for the Chinese. Actually, they never distributed the wealth from the houses that had gold and money. Clothes and dresses, they put them on. They were saying that the mad person called Yagchö was going around in satin dresses. This was just to show that they were doing something. In reality, the wealth of the kudrak that was confiscated was never given to the people. Neither gold nor money. Only useless things. No turquoise, no coral, nothing. Just things kudrak wore, like clothes and shoes. Finally, even the beggars saw into this policy [facade] thinking, "Oh, they said that they were going to distribute [everything], but this is all we got." What's the use of wearing satin dresses? Even if you wanted to sell it, there were no buyers. When one had it, they took it away. If you said sell, there was no one to buy. Earlier, the wealth of the Tibetan government kudrak, the turquoise, coral, pearls, diamonds, the beggars got nothing. Later, what people had, they said to bring it all up and, "Come and let us weigh it all." They said such great things and poor fellows, whatever they had they pooled and weighed it. The money, they gave them whatever suited their fancy [unclear]. So they did not have any good solid policy to show, something that the people could believe in. That's what I really think, and as far as the Buddhist faith, once the communist system began, then—for example, we heard when we were young that the seat of Khalka Jetsun Dampa [Tib. ཁེ་ཁ་རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ] in Mongolia was destroyed by the Communists. Khalka Jetsun Dampa was a very important Buddhist figure, one who had relations with Tibet and who taught at Sendregasum. In my country, there was this Mongolian geshe—what's his name—Shiwala [Tib. ཞི་བ་ལྷ]. He got first place among the Geshe Lharamba in the great monasteries. He went down, who knows where, but somewhere in China. His country (Mongolia) was reformed by the Communists, and he could not go and returned and stayed in our Litang Monastery. We asked him to stay and our Dialectics Tratsang was very big. The geshe used to say that our lamas and monasteries had all been destroyed. So everybody knew. To know that they were going to destroy, we did not have to look far. Our other monasteries had already been destroyed. In this way, when it came to the Buddhist faith, we had no faith in him (Chinese). Then when they did the reforms in Dartsedo and Minyag, we were witnessing it! The wealthy households suffered so much. Just a bit wealthy, they took them and pulled down from their head and held struggle sessions against them. It was just too much! So as they gradually came up, we had seen it all. Most of us Litangba saw this. There was nothing to think except that these Communists really did such amazing things. They did a lot. They made them hold the study sessions and said that the reforms were just great. It's said that they were lecturing the 500-600 beggars of Litang. They had a meeting. We had someone staying in our courtyard, poor fellow. A man, and he had a mother who was lame. They went there [meeting] and told us that whatever bad things you said, they [Chinese] were happy. If you said something a little positive, they hated it. It was like that! For example, Gyadotsang's servant, you know Wangdü and others? Yes, their servant said, "If one said bad things about Gyadotsang, they were very happy." He told them [the Chinese], "I don't have anything to criticize [the] Gyadotsang family. Earlier, I was poor and they did not rob me. When I had no food, they gave me food, and when I had no clothes, they gave me clothes." They did not like that and told him, "Your study [session] will be finished tomorrow. After tomorrow, you do not have to come." This was their outlook. During this period, they were being very clever and sweet, but the crux of the matter was that they wanted to make the democratic reforms. No matter, how clever or sweet they were, this was their aim. Anyway, they kept on saying all the sweet things, that they would take from the wealthy and distribute to the poor.   

**Q:**  You were there in 1950, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when the Communists first came to our country, I was there. I think they came to our country towards the end of 1949. I came to Lhasa in 1950. When I got to Lhasa, the Communists had just arrived. When I returned from India, the Chinese were going via Yadong to the Indian border.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa, it was regarding trade?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who else was with you and what did you trade in?   

**A:**  When I was small, should I say small? I was around 19. In our monastery, there were those who did not study pecha [and who] had to go as servants of the monastery's jiso. The monastery had communal [Tib. སྤྱི་པ] traders. So I came as the jiso's servant to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. If one was capable, one would become a jiso's trader. If not, then one would serve the jiso with various chores. One had to be a horseman, a muleteer, and work in the monastery kitchen as a cook and kitchen helper, [and do] all kinds [of work]. In this way, I came [to Lhasa]. As a youngster, I was sort of intelligent. I was 17. I did the jiso trading and accounting and later I became a trader for the jiso. So I was sent to Calcutta and everywhere. Even though I was young, I was sent. I could go. He preferred that I go rather than the adults.   

**Q:**  What did you trade in?   

**A:**  When we came to India, we would buy coral, cloth materials, aluminum pots, and whatever one could find in India that one needed in this worldly existence.   

**Q:**  Couldn't you buy these things in Kalimpong? Why did you have to go to Calcutta?   

**A:**  It was cheaper in Calcutta. Turquoise and corals in the old days were very cheap. They were telling me later—when I was young, there were a hell of a lot of corals. The people who sold them looked liked Iranians and Arabians. When I was in Calcutta, I bought two or three boxes and they were not that expensive. After that, they were saying that the corals did not come. It was like that. We bought corals and took [them] to our country, and then we bought copper pots. Mainly they were woolen and other materials, aluminum pots. There wasn't this or that thing, we bought and took everything.   

**Q:**  You bought this and took [it] to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  You could sell [everything] in Lhasa and this was called middle trade [Tib. བར་ཚོང], but we took it to Litang.   

**Q:**  So you didn't go to Lhasa first?   

**A:**  Yes, we went.   

**Q:**  So you went to Lhasa and then to Kham Litang?   

**A:**  Yes, without going to Lhasa, there was no way.   

**Q:**  Couldn't you go by the southern route?   

**A:**  No, no. I'm sure there was a road, but we didn't go [on it]. We went to Lhasa and there we packed them and sent them down.   

**Q:**  Then from Litang, you went trading towards Dartsedo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Dartsedo is towards the Chinese border, right? If you go to China, then you will arrive in Dartsedo.   

**Q:**  From Dartsedo, the trade is mainly in tea?   

**A:**  Tea, khata and silk. But the greatest demand was in tea. In terms of percentages, probably 90 percent was tea. Then about five percent was in khata and the rest in silk and satin.   

**Q:**  At the border, did you have to pay taxes called the shotre [Tib. ཤོ་ཁྲལ]?   

**A:**  In the earlier days, one would meet the Tibetan government's salt tax collector, tsasho. If you did meet him, then, they did levy some taxes. At Nagchuka, if you brought tea, the taxes were quite high. For 10 boxes, the Tibetan government took one.   

**Q:**  From 10, one?   

**A:**  They say that this was for the Mönlam when the Sendregasum monks gathered. That was all lies. For the prayer assembly tea [Tib. ཚོགས་ཇ], out of 100 boxes, maybe one was given, they ate [took for themselves] all the rest.   

**Q:**  When you first came to Kalimpong, your thoughts were to contact the Guomindang and [you] hoped to be dropped in Kham, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Around this time or later on, were the Guomindang helping some groups?   

**A:**  At this time, it seemed like the Guomindang were helping. I should not say seemed. When we were at Kalimpong, we met a Guomindang man. He and his wife were living not very far from Kangchen Cinema. When one observed [them], the two seemed to be working for the Guomindang. Our companion, Tsewang Dorje, the one dropped in Kham, he spoke Chinese well. He met the Guomindang man and they spoke. And the Guomindang man said that this was very good and that he would discuss [talk with him]. "You have come from Kham Litang, and so we are the same and we can help. You have young people going and this is very good." He said that they would help with the arms and ammunition. So we discussed [things]. We were 27 people and we were divided into two eating communes [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང]. One was staying at Manjula Khoti and Alo Chöndze was staying somewhere close by. We talked with them [& Guomindang man] and said, "Well, this is very good, and as many of us as possible, we should go." He [Guomindang] said that all of us would be able to go. So we contacted him and discussed, and he was saying to bring a list of the people. It was around this stage, and I don't quite remember if my companion did or did not give the list. Anyway, we met Gyalo Thondup one day and he said that Taiwan couldn't help and that they themselves were getting help from the U.S. So we did not go [to the Guomindang] thinking that if Gyalo could contact the U.S.; America was much more famous and so we got ready to go to America. I think that if we had gone with Taiwan, they may have been more useful, at least on the Litang side. I think that way at times. I don't know if they could have done something on the Ü side, but on the Kham side, if they had dropped us arms, we probably could have made some battle out of it.   

**Q:**  Prior to this, were the Guomindang helping other groups?   

**A:**  That I have not heard. Earlier, when the Guomindang lost China and just arrived in Taiwan, there was a part of Amdo that revolted. I heard that the Guomindang dropped one or two people and arms. This was in Amdo Nara. I have heard this. It seems that this is correct because later I asked some Amdowas and I heard that that was correct. Other than that, I don't think they did anything else for us. Later, when Chushigandru came, when they were at the border in Mustang and other places, the Guomindang made plans to help the Chushigandru and set up organizations like ours. When they shipped arms and ammunition, they got caught at Mumbai. Not really arms, I should say, it was wireless sets. Some were caught at Darjeeling and others in Mumbai. I have heard such a story. So like the Tibetans, the Guomindang had a lot of plans to do something from the borders, but nothing substantial. It seems they were able to send spies and things like that. In Calcutta, there was Pemba Lhundrup [Tib. སྤེན་པ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ]. I think he's still around, and he was a Guomindang newspaper reporter and he sent spies to the borders and was doing different things. I have heard that he took a lot of money from the Guomindang and told some lies. When I asked how he lied, they say he made fires at the walls of the empty ruins in Tibet, then took photographs and said that they were Chinese houses that were burned and took money (laughter). They must have said that for the money. They probably never did get to burning Chinese houses. I have heard such a story.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, when one talks about the Chushigandru, there are names like Jagö Namgyal Dorje and Jamatsang. Where were they [in the Chushigandru]?   

**A:**  There were various groups [Tib. ཤོཀ]. Jamatsang was [one of] our Litangba people. He was one of the larger houses in Litang. Earlier, all of the large traders were larger families. Jagö Namgyal Dorje, or Jagötsang, was from Derge. There was the famous Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོས་སྟོབས་ལྡན] in the earlier days with the Chinese. Jagö Namgyal Dorje was from that [family] and he started the Biri Settlement [in India]. He died in India. He was head of the Derge unit, not the whole Chushigandru. Jamatsang was a Litangba and when the Litangbas came to Lhoka, he was one of the elders. Later, when Andrutsang sort of flattered him, you know he was from a large family and he was wealthy? Later, he went to Taiwan. I think the wife of one of the elder sons of Yuthok was Jamatsang's daughter. What was his name? The one in Seattle?   

**Q:**  Yuthok?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Jigmela [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས].   

**A:**  Is it?   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, Dündüla [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་ལགས].   

**A:**  Yes. She is the elder Jamatsang's girl. I think the middle one is in Taiwan. The younger one is in Nepal.   

**Q:**  Does Alo Chöndze have any connection with Chushigandru?   

**A:**  At the moment, nothing.   

**Q:**  No. No. Earlier.   

**A:**  Earlier, speaking about the relations with Chushigandru, he first started the Tibetan People's Association. After this was banned, he fled to India. He stayed in Kalimpong, and we Chushigandru had also fled to Kalimpong. There were stories that he used to come to the Chushigandru meetings. He is from the Chushigandru region. Later, he went to Mysore where he was some head of the construction and a trader for the Finance Office [of the Tibetan government in exile], Penjor Legung [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་ལས་ཁུངས]. So he did not participate in Chushigandru meetings. Since I took interest in Chushigandru, it has been many years and I have not seen him come to any meetings.   

**Q:**  There are so many things said about Alo Chöndze. What is the problem & what was he supposed to have done?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth and to judge correctly, I feel that both sides are at fault. In the first place, his problem is that he is very aggressive [Tib. ང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོ].   

**Q:**  His character is like that?   

**A:**  Yes, and also, one of the strange things about Tibetan society is we like to be spiteful [Tib. བསམ་གནག] against people. Previously, there were times when Alo Chöndze was very poor in Calcutta, and along with his wife, he sold bread. Finally, he came to Dharamsala where he was sort of in charge of the forest [Tib. ཤིང་ནགས་འགོ་པ]. In Tibet, he built some houses and it was just said that he was good at building houses. In Dharamsala he was sort of head of construction. He did well and when the aid organization [Tib. རོགས་རམ་ཚོགས་པ] built a house in the Mysore Settlement, he was sent to supervise it. When he got there, he took it on lease from the Settlement Office and built the house for the people. . While he was there, he bought many empty lands and planted crops, and he did very well [economically]. At this stage, the Tibetan government made trade connections with Alo Chöndze. It is said that the Tibetan government did it and he did not ask for it. It is said that the Dalai Lama himself said that it would be good if he did it. So he agreed. It seems that this did not work out. Corn was bought at a high price and later the price dropped, so there was a loss.   

**Q:**  What trade was it in? In Mysore?   

**A:**  In corn. We Tibetans plant corn, right? He bought this and later he lost his capital when it was sold. Then he also set up the machine for grinding fodder for the cows and horses, and he made relations with the Tibetan government's Penjor Legung [Economics Office]. So a lot of work was done. It seems, to tell you the truth, that this trade became bankrupt. When Alo Chöndze and Penjor Legung divided the trade accounts, problems arose with that factory. Alo Chöndze, at that time, probably did not have much money. The Tibetan government thought that somebody should keep the factory, but thought that if Alo Chöndze kept it, he would not be able to return the money. If the Tibetan government kept it, they thought that they should not put a high price [on the factory]. So the kalön in charge of the Penjor Legung and others decided to put a price on the factory. It was priced at three or four lakhs. When they were considering who would keep it, Alo Chöndze said, "Please hand it to me." He said that for the first year he would give one lakh and that every year after that, one lakh. I think it was [a total of] three lakhs. He made the first year payment and said that for whatever the interest [was] for the two lakhs, he would pay [it]. In three years, he agreed to pay it all off. The Penjor Legung Kalön agreed. That evening, when all returned home, at that time, there were two deputies of the people. One was Drawu Pön [Tib. གྲའུ་དཔོན] and the [other was the] Ütsang representative, Dorje Dramdrü [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་དགྲ་འདུལ]. They told the kalön that what he had agreed to was not good. The factory was priced too low and it was lost to Alo Chöndze, and the remainder of the money he did not even get. So the next day, the kalön said that agreeing to pay the money later was not acceptable. They wanted the whole three lakh payment that year. Alo Chöndze probably spat on his face saying "Thuiee! You lousy guy. A Tibetan government kalön who cannot keep his word and changes today what was said last night." When this happened, there was a Tiu Khamba by the name of Karma who was sent by the Tibetan government to work with Alo Chöndze. He seems to have said something and when he did, Alo Chöndze picked up the glass ashtray and hit him on the head, resulting in a wound. The two deputies were there and then they caught him, and after some bickering, the kalön and the two left. This resulted in a court case. This court case turned out to be very intricate. This kalön turned out to be a very immoral [Tib. མ་རབས] person. When the case started and when they asked whose money was this in the Penjor Legung, it was said that it belonged to the Trust Bank [the Dalai Lama Charitable Trust]. When they asked who the owner of the Trust Bank was, it was said that it belonged to the Dalai Lama, which is true. It was in the Dalai Lama's name. So they made the Dalai Lama as the opponent to Alo Chöndze because usually, they would make the owner of the wealth the opponent. So at the Mysore court, when they called out Alo Chöndze's family, he had brought about 10 people. Then they called out the Dalai Lama and it seems that Karma must have come as the Dalai Lama's representative. When the name Dalai Lama was called, Alo Chöndze said, "Wait a minute. I don't have anything against the Dalai Lama. It's not the Dalai Lama, you have made a mistake." Then Alo Chöndze's lawyer said, "No, that's not it. You better not talk or you are going to lose the case." Alo Chöndze said, "The Dalai Lama is not my opponent, but it is the Penjor Legung Kalön. I can't challenge the Dalai Lama, he is my root guru. Please, for the time being, withdraw and delay the case." So Alo Chöndze petitioned the Tibetan government saying that this Penjor Kalön was malicious [Tib. དཔེ་མ་སྲིད་པ་ཡིན]. He had put the Dalai Lama in the court. He said that this was just too much. The Tibetan government did not say anything and just kept quiet because they didn't know what to do. The reason is that they already said that the capital belonged to the Trust. When this happened, Alo Chöndze thought, "Oh, the Dalai Lama hates me so much. Not only me, my whole family has been made to become the opponent of the law case. The Dalai Lama hates me this much and I am very disappointed." So he made a petition which said, "Dalai Lama, if you have so much desire for my property, then please don't sue me. I will offer you everything." It was a very crafty/shrewd [Tib. གནག་པོ] petition. Anyway, the case was at the court and nothing could be done. I don't know what the decision made by the court was, but Alo Chöndze could not give the money. Anyway, whatever he had there, the house, other assets, belonged to the Tibetan government. So I always say, "Alo Chöndze, poor guy, his bad karma. He can't keep his mouth shut and his hands down." That was his fault. Other than that, who could say one was not allowed to get bankrupt in trade, and in any case, you have to get the profit? If that was the case, that he was well off and the Tibetan government lost money, then he was at fault. But if he became bankrupt, then what could one do? I think at that time, the Tibetan government did not do things truthfully and well. Around that time, I became a deputy and in our Standing Committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས་ལྷན་ཚོགས], Alo Chöndze was sending a lot of petitions. Prior to ours, during the time of the 6th People's Assembly, there was an order that whatever petitions Alo Chöndze gave were not to be opened, and they had gotten approval [from the Dalai Lama] with the seal on it. So the petitions were all returned and Alo Chöndze was not paid attention to, no matter [if] he submitted the petition [on paper] or made verbal reports. So he ran to the Chinese. This is what happened and it's hard to say this happened and that happened. It was mainly a money matter and so poor guy, [he needed some consideration] since he was really in the People's Association who said that Tibet is Tibet and China is China and went to hand in a petition on the Chinese table. Truthfully, he, and there was the Tsangpa kudrak, were very good people.   

**Q:**  Is Tsangpa kudrak, Pisur?   

**A:**  No. No! Not Pisur. He died. A monk official. That's what happened and it came to concern the money of the Tibetan government. We lost all of our political power and left the Potala, and came to other people's countries. Now, if he became rich, and if he didn't pay the money to the Tibetan government, then they could shout. So, as I look at it, this whole thing was rather useless. He was aggressive and handed in all kinds of petitions. Finally, he also kind of played it up [Tib. bkyak bkyag byas] and ran to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Chinese didn't pay much attention to him. Is that right?   

**A:**  I believe that even if they did pay attention to him, he was not satisfied. He was hoping to, from the religious side, to try and improve the monasteries in Tibet and hoped to do good for the religion, as well as for worldly affairs. But, the Chinese did not trust him and did not let him to do this. Likewise, if he wanted to do something political, obviously they would not have allowed that. If he wanted to turn against the Dalai Lama and us, the Chinese would not have let Alo Chöndze, one person, do that recklessly because of their politics. I feel that they did not let him to do these things. There was no goal except to sit and eat the Chinese salary. So he escaped this side again. Actually, they did give him a great rank. He was a representative in the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མེ་ཚོགས་ཆེན]. He had to stay in Beijing. He left everything in his apartment and told them that he was going for a holiday for the Tibetan New Year. He said that he had not seen his children for many years. He was going to see his children in Australia, "And so please give us two elderly people [wife?] a holiday." So he took a month's leave. He went to Australia and did not return. That's the story.   

