# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0007.03 : Tape 3  
##  :(Litang) (Litang) Athar, Ngawang Norbu [Tib. (ལི་ཐང) ཨ་ཐར་ངག་དབང་ནོར་བུ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Majnu Tila, New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** 7 April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** (Litang) Athar, Ngawang Norbu [Tib. (ལི་ཐང) ཨ་ཐར་ངག་དབང་ནོར་བུ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 62  
**Date of Birth:** 1931  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Norbu [Tib. ངག་དབང་ནོར་བུ], also known as Litang Athar [Tib. ལི་ཐང་ཨ་ཐར], was a monk and trader in Bö. He was part of the first group of six Khambas taken from Kalimpong to Saipan in 1957 by the CIA for training. He was parachuted into Central Tibet in October 1957 to make contact for the Americans with Phala and the Dalai Lama. In this interview, he discusses the separation of Jenkhentsisum and Alo Chöndze, the letter to the Sikkim concerning the Sikkim money and he briefs upon the wool trade with the U.S. and the wool trade money. He talks about Alo Chöndze’s message to Yönrupön to “send tea,” as a sign to make war or not and exposes this as a lie. He describes how the wireless was sent through code numbers, talks about his parachute practice training and his daily activities in Okinawa. Finally, he discusses the changing attitude of the U.S. towards the Tibetans, such as how they were treated during their training, the quality of guns they were given and building the U.S. air strip in East Pakistan.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0007_03/H_0007_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What I had asked you earlier let me question you later. First I wanted to ask you this - earlier, you had come to Kalimpong, right? And so were there many Tibetan Association, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག] An association, club.">kyidu</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག] or political organizations [Tib. ཚོགས་པ] when you came to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  When we came to Kalimpong in 1956. At that time, there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>; the Prime Minister, Silön [Tib. སྲིད་བློན] Lhukhangwa, Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, and Jayangshar Khenjung. So along with them it seems that there was one aristocrats, kudra [Tib. སྐུ་དྲག] group. Among the 3 kudra that ran away were- perhaps all are dead now. One was Kungö Thutén Nyingji [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད], who was later the Education [Tib. ཤེས་རིག] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, then there was Jampa Wangdu [Tib.བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས] - remember the one in Dharamsala? And Jampa Tsöndrü [Tib. བརྩོན་འགྲུས]. The 3 of them via Gyantse or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> came secretly at that time. So among the kudra I think these ones were there. At that time, among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s there was the elderly monk Gyadotsang Largen [Tib. བླ་རྒན], Andrutsang Lodrö Phuntso the nephew of Andru Jinda. It seems that there was a Khamba group. Around this time when the Dalai Lama arrived there were representatives of the three great monastery, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a>. I remember there was some one nicknamed Ganden Bago [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྦ་གོག] an elderly monk who had a goiter. He may have been a representative of Ganden. I don't know how they came from Tibet - among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> there was Gyetong who is now in Canada. It was people like them. So I think at that time, there was some kind of group. There was. At that time, when we went to make a petition to the Indian government saying that Chinese started a fight at Litang and how they aerial bombed the monastery, they were the ones who were heading the petition drive. At that time, Alo Chöndze was there. It was said that in Tibet he was not allowed [to pursue his activities] and some among the Sendregasum stood guarantee for him. At that time, he secretly fled via Bhutan. Some of us Litangpas reached him to the Bhutanese border. So he was also in Kalimpong. At that time, he was famous and they all made petition to the Indian government and things like that. So when we went to make the petition Alo Chöndze and all were there. There were many. We were young at that time and didn't pay much heed to the politics. If somebody said to come along we just say okay and went and we did not pay heed to politics nor did we know politics and did not pay attention to who was whom and what they were doing. However, there were groups like that who shout slogans saying that they are not doing this or that for Tibet.   

**Q:**  You mentioned Alo Chöndze and so this reminded me of something? Some say that Alo Chöndze, Phünkhang Lhajam and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> at first were all working together or something like that. Then it was said that they did not get along and Alo Chöndze and Phünkhang formed one group and Jenkhentsisum was a different one. And so what was all this about?   

**A:**  As I look at it. Together with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> was Gyalo Thöndup. Regarding Alo Chöndze, Yuthok who was probably in Kalimpng then, Phünkhang Lhajam , when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was at Lhoka I came once [to Kalimpong] and there was such talk about them. What was said was that as they needed to form a power group. And at that time, the Tibetan government had some money. Later, in the Dalai Lama name there were some silver and gold at Gangtok. At that time, it seems to me that Alo Chöndze and they did not have any letter from the Kashag or the government. Then there was Phala Drönyerchemmo and a group who were opposing and challenging the Chinese. It seems there may have been a letter from Phala to Jenkhentsisum saying to help Alo Chöndze.   

**Q:**  A letter to Sikkim?   

**A:**  To Kalimpong. When Alo Chöndze was escaping there may have been a letter asking to help Alo Chöndze. Now it seems to me that Alo Chöndze and they were probably saying that they need the Tibetan government money for this and that. At that time, the main <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> was Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Jayangshar Khenjung who took the possession of the gold and silver. So two of them said that without a Kashag or Tibetan government letter we cannot just give you the gold and silver. So this is what I heard at that time. It seems to me that this is correct. So it seems that from this perspective they did not get along. From the political perspective what I heard was that Phünkhang Lhajam was the one who introduced Gyalo Thöndup to the Americans. Finally, since Gyalo Thöndup was the brother of the Dalai Lama and had a big name, the Americans from the realistic perspective worked with Gyalo Thöndup. And so this happened where they slightly didn't get along well on the politics.   

**Q:**  Yes, sort of like a take over.   

**A:**  It seems to me that at that time, the expenses that Gyalo Thöndup and others were occurring it seems to me that they were using this Tibetan government money. They were doing some work, at that time right? So Gyalo Thöndup along with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> was one group and it seems that Alo Chöndze, Phünkhang Lhajam, Yuthok's group became sort of powerless. So it seems that that was the reason. I don't know everything about it, but one reason was this money- and so I had heard that about these two things .   

**Q:**  It is said that not only the Sikkim money but there was something about the wool trade money that the Tibetan government had. Did you ever hear this?   

**A:**  I think this was not the case. I don't think there was any money that Tibetan government had through wool trade. At that time, there was the 13 group of traders called Tsongkhag Jusum [Tib. tshong khag bju gsum] like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a>-Pomda-Reting and so from this, they had brought a lot of wool to India. In the early times, the Americans used to by the wool. But at that time, since our Tibet was lost to the Chinese, the Americans did not buy the wool. At that time, it was said the price fell and it presented a lot of difficulties. At that time, they pooled all the wool and sold them together and they divided the money among the various traders. I don't know whether some did not collect the money or that there was surplus after dividing, but there were 5-6 lakhs Rupees surplus. I think it was 5. Since, there was this surplus, at this time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was at Lhoka making war, and Sandu Lo Nyendra, Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ], Jangtsa [Tib. འཇང་ཚ] Chöndze had gone to Kalimpong. They said that the Chushigandru is fighting and that we need help from everyone. So it is said that the 5 lakhs from the Group of 13 Traders was given to the Chushigandru because there wasn't any body to give and there was trouble in Tibet. So this seems to be the truth. So I heard this but I have not heard from anyone about Tibetan government money from wool trade. The surplus money was from the Tsongkhag Jusum headed by Sandu - Pomda - Reting-whether they sold to the Americans or they Indians, they did sell .The reason why the price of wool fell was that since Tibet was lost to the Chinese the American-Tibetan trade ceased. It was said that the price fell and all the traders lost money. So this is true facts as I know of 2 fellow Litangpas who had a most difficult time. So it seems that this 5 lakhs was given to Chushigandru. Later, when we came to India we had no money, right? When the Mustang base was started about 3.5 lakhs was spent and it was said that the money came from this wool surplus money. When we first sent soldiers, it's said that they were sent by this money. So only this and I have not heard about Tibetan government surplus money.   

**Q:**  From our intelligence side there seems to be one group in the states and around Kolcutta it seems that there was a house rented. Now <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and the Americans were having connection at Kolcutta Consulate. So how was this relation with the consulate done?   

**A:**  I don't know how it was done earlier. We were asked by Gyalo Thöndup to come. Today it is Bangladesh and so we were sent directly from East Pakistan for training and we didn't know one thing about what relations were done . Later, when we started the military base at Lhoka and the opening ceremonies were over, the Americans asked me to come. At that time, I came to India through Gyalo Thöndup and we had to go to Kolcutta to meet. When we went, there was no house and we stayed at a hotel. I don't remember, there was some hotel behind the Park hotel. [Yabshi] Trunyila was sent as my interpreter. I don't know how they sent the message and I don't know whether it was the consulate or not - most probably seemed like a consulate. But at that time, we didn't know what kind of house or whose - we had just come from Tibet. So I met once. I was interviewed and the help that I was requesting was finally settled at Kolcutta. So I have done this much and I don't know whether we had some house specially rented or not.   

**Q:**  Yes, I now remember from the previous interview. Trunyila said that he was going to come within a week. Where did he go for that week?   

**A:**  I don't know whether he went to the States or to some headquarters where they made the decision. For example, I was interviewed regarding the period from the time they dropped me in Tibet to the time I met them that day. Then when they asked what the plan was, I gave all the plans. There was one plan of Andru Gombo Tashi and the Chushigandru. Then my companion and I had another plan. So we handed in two plans. The reason why the two of us handed a plan was that we had previously been trained by them and we had thoughts that they would give as we had requested. Then all arms that could be carried on foot and we didn't say anything about too many things. Our main point was that people need to be trained. That the two of us are not enough. We had to send wireless, collect news, make maps and everything. So we said that 500 people must be trained. So we thought that if this 500 could be trained for wireless communication, guerrilla warfare etc, and then returned to Tibet we thought that we could then manage. They agreed with this and so it continued up to 1962, the training at Colorado and all. The arms that we requested were those that could be carried by one person and a horse or mule. Chushingdru, poor guys, they did not know any better - they requested large arms and we didn't have vehicles to transport them.   

**Q:**  What were they saying that they wanted?   

**A:**  Like large cannons, large machine guns, howitzers. Poor guys, at that time it was even difficult to know the names of the arms, right? We knew the names of the guns and asked for all the small arms and even if it could not be carried by one person - then at least on a horse. Arms that could be unloaded onto the ground by one or two persons. So this was the plan and these were given. For example there was cannon 57, 50 "calumber" machine gun, A4 and A6, 303 the English machine gun. At that time, I used to remember all the names and numbers but now I have forgotten. At that time, they accepted give most of these arms.   

**Q:**  In 1958, it seems like the Americans were opposing against communists all over, in Korea and other places. In Tibet, it seems that this was their plan according to what they were saying. They were saying that they were thinking about make secret cells or small groups. The idea was not to fight in Tibet, but to form some small underground group. Did they say anything like this to you?   

**A:**  Probably, it was similar .   

**Q:**  You were trained at Okinawa and was there this plan to start this group?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes, this was there. It was in the plan and in the training. Actually, even if one started a guerilla group one has to have some small group, right? So it was similar . The reason being according to their training if war was started immediately, we can not challenge the communist. They will calculate 100% and they also train us like this. For example, if fighting was started immediately then one was outnumbered in persons and arms. So this they considered not possible and actually, it was indeed impossible. What they were doing was to get to form smaller groups that would fight the communists. When this was done it had to be done secretly. You can't say I'm going to start one. For example, it had to be formed under the clever enemy eyes of the communist. So they did put into practice in a similar way. What was done was as I have said last time, they trained 6 persons and 4 were sent to Kham and two to Ü [Tib. དབུས]. So actually these were to form an organization. Later training was done and they did what they could. However, it seems that when we were trained, it was a kind of a trail. The reason being they wanted to find out if what we were saying was true or not. If we send them, then are they going to carry it out or not. Are they capable or not. Would they do it or not. So they were checking this out. For example when I went and then returned. You know we were trained for 6-7 months and based on that training when we related what we had done, they praised us very much. They said that for someone who was trained for just 6-7 months we are very happy about your performance. They had great believe in us, so that later they continued to train many in Colorado. For example when we were there and they asked the arms to be dropped, we were afraid that when the arms were dropped it might get into communist hands and so the two of us prevented the drops. We said don't drop since we can't hold on to territory. So they were very happy about this. The reason being that when we needed we said to drop and when we did not need we did not ask. And so they believed that we honestly asked for drops when we actually needed them. So their belief in us grew. So later a lot of arms were dropped. The ones who went to Kham like Gyado Wangdü and others were not able to do a proper job. The reason being that- there was already in existence a guerilla group and the fight had already started. So for this reason there was needed immediate drop of arms. There was no need to form an organization since it was already there, the revolt had started and people had started to flee. So the Americans were not able to drop arms there and from their side they had only one person to send the wireless and he didn't know it very well. One person was not able to go. Before one can ask for a drop there were so many things to get that one had to get ready. I feel that this they were not able to do. For example, they have to see if there are any problems if the plane comes over a specific area. So all the detailed signals must be given, otherwise they can't come. The drop zone, the place where the drop is made has to be a very safe and secretive place. All this has to be ready. One has to say this is the first , then the second and then the third. Whether there are radar nearby or jets chasing. All this must be indicated. So I think they were not able to give the proper signal and the Americans also did not make approximate area drops. If they dropped where we were, then they would have dropped where they are right? We were one group, the same. So as you have said about their plans, I think this is true. One has to start with small groups and then proceed to larger ones. That too one has to do so secretly or there is no way to do it.   

**Q:**  When they dropped you there, were they dropping you for the wireless and communication reasons or were they telling you to try to gather people and start a group?   

**A:**  For the start of the organization my main contacts were Phala Drönyerchemmo and Andru Gombo Tashi. And then we were together going to start an organization. So whatever business they had to say we were to communicate. And whether it was to start an organization or whatever work we were to see how we were going to do things. How we were going to revolt against the Chinese. Whether from a peaceful point of view or militantly. So we were to gradually to give those plans. So it was these things- to start an organization, to communicate both.   

**Q:**  What should I say, when you were all in the hills and those places, there were Chinese spies every where, right? And they knew things quite easily, right? Now from the government side they had no plans, isn't it?   

**A:**  From the government side, it was difficult to say that Phala Drönyerchemmo was the government, yet at the same time, since he was an official of the government, it was difficult to say that he was not. Not only an official but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> to the Dalai Lama. So drönyerchemmo had a group. This group was truly one that did not like the communists and one who if necessary would challenge the Chinese. So among the kudra of the Tibetan government, they were the ones. Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s, mainly under Andru Gombo Tashi the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was another group. The reason why it is said Chushigandru is that all the well known traders of Kham - for example, if we consider from the lower regions then Tiu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khamba, Litangpa, Chantrengpa, Gyelthangpa, etc, etc- there were about 32-35 various groups. So from these groups the better traders, the wealthy ones - at that time when we say the better, we mean the wealthy ones. They got together and formed the Gombo Tashi group. Now, be that as it may be, but from the kudra side, the actual government side could not have plans and could not challenge the communists. Nothing. In the corner side [Tib. ཁུག་ཀྱོག] was the drönyerchemmo group saying-now what's the best to do and they had contact with us Khambas, the Gombo Tashi group. So they were together with Gombo Tashi. Finally in 1957, the Chushigandru offered the golden throne to the Dalai Lama. A long life ritual was also performed, a Kalachakra initiation was received and then turning to religion, it started from there. So the Chushigandru started from there. For this, Phala Drönyerchemmo and they tried to give whatever support they could. Because they were saying that the Khambas were going to form a group. But most of the kudra like the Tibetan government kalön and the Kashag, they were not saying anything. I don't know if there were one or two who were allowed to say were saying things through Phala Drönyerchemmo, but they never got together and discussed and said that they were going to form something. So that was the situation at that time. For example, this is what they were telling the two of us. I think I mentioned to you last time. We were told that if the two of you want to have an audience with the Dalai Lama, then go ahead and ask since they will allow you.   

**Q:**  Yes, you mentioned it last time.   

**A:**  So we went to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> twice with our monk's robes on. At first, when they said that they would allow us an audience and to come - they knew that -we had relations. But, when we actually went, they said they could not give us an audience for this and that reason. I don't know. So, as I have mentioned, when we got to the border the Dalai Lama said that I heard that you two had come, but I was not able to meet you. So don't feel disappointed. He knew but people inside at that time, may have felt that there were certain people in the government that they may have feared would know about it. Probably, at that time, there were powerful Chinese spies around the Dalai Lama. There may have been spies to see whose come and what they were doing. So for fear of this they did not dare to allow the audience. So at that time, like an organization there were two but in the end, the government could not do anything, because drönyerchemmo and his group said that they could not take the risk because they could not do any thing without doing that [reporting?] to the Dalai Lama and so Gombo Tashi and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> decided that they are going to do things militantly and leave to the outside. And so they left. At that time, the Panglung Gyechen who is the Dorje Shungden, prophesied that one must leave before the 20th day of the 4th month otherwise he can't be responsible. So we left on the 4th Tibetan month day 16. So Gombo Tashi, I and my companion and about 80-90 riders left Lhasa for Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Yes, this was well mentioned by you, I remember well. Now in 1956 Alo Chöndze and others started a People's Association, right?   

**A:**  Now Gombo Tashi and all were in it. In this was Gyadotsang Kesang, the one who lives in New York - he was in it. Regarding this you ask him Kesang who lives in New york and who's here now. If you ask him he can tell you clearly. He was in it. Probably, where ever the People's Association went he was there with Jindag [Andru]. Regarding the Alo Chöndze's story and about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Kudra [Tib. གཙང་པ་སྐུདྲག] [note: This must be the Lhabchug, Tib. lhab phyug] how the Tibetan People's Association started, and how Zhang Guohua and Zhang Jingwu banged their fists on the table and where a petition was handed and it was said that Tibet is Tibet and China is China and you Chinese, please go back. Our Gyado Kesang who lives in New York knows the whole story.   

**Q:**  Yes, I will ask him. But let me ask you this. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was set up and the long life ritual was performed and the golden throne was made, were the People's Association and the Chushigandru together or were they separate?   

**A:**  The People's Association that was started by Alo Chöndze and others. It was called Tibetan People's Association. After this was started, Alo Chöndze and others distributed different kinds of leaflets all over and Zhang Guohua and Zhang Jingwu . said that Tibet is Tibet and China is China and so you please go back to your own country and we are having a lot of difficulty with our livelihood. So when the petition was given, the Chinese banned the People's Association. The Chinese said that they will take action and the they arrested Alo Chöndze and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Kudra. They [Chinese] said that if the Tibetan government doesn't arrest them they said that they were going to arrest. So the Tibetan government arrested them and put them in the Police Office. Inwardly they were not prisoners but outwardly they were kept at the Police Office. Finally, when they [Chinese] said that they cannot be released and the Chinese said that they should be handed over to the Chinese and the Tibetan government did not. At that time, in order to release them it was said that from now on they will not engage in any political activity and that the People's Association cannot meet. Certain abbots of the three great monasteries, Sendreghasum made guarantees and the two were released. From then on the Tibetan People's Association was ended. It did not exist. The Chinese stopped it saying that it was not permitted. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> started, if they said that they were some People's Association organization then they cannot start. So what Gombo Tashi planned was that they were going to perform a long life ritual for the Dalai Lama and offer a golden throne and that they were going to be patrons of the Kalachakra Initiation. So when they said that they were going to make a golden throne it was built in the place where they used to keep firewood for the Mönlam, Shingra [Tib. ཤིང་ར] near the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> after requesting the government. Now the contributions for the golden throne, all the people of Lhasa and one can't distinguish between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> - all Tibetans went and made contributions in the Shingra. So the Chinese thought that they were going to make a religious offering to the Dalai Lama and since they said that there was freedom of religion - and since at that time they were saying sweet things it was just left at that and they did not stop it. So everybody made money or gold contributions and a golden throne was made. After the throne was offered, the long life ritual was performed and along with that the Dalai Lama gave the Kalachakra Initiation. So the left over money, it was not put away immediately and from inside the Chushigandru was started. So that's how Chushigandru was started. Did you understand this?   

**Q:**  Yes, now I did.   

**A:**  The Tibetan People's Association was completely banned.   

**Q:**  So the long life ritual and the golden throne was done only for the sake of starting the Chushugangdru, right?   

**A:**  Although all the People's Association was there, but the main work was done by Chushigandru. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders. However, there was contribution from the three provinces, Chökhasum. For example, some of the kudra helped in that. Drönyerchemmo and their kind offered all the necessary assistance. But the work was done by the Khamba traders, the responsibility. The contributions were done by all. For example, the patron for the Kalachakra Initiation was equally shared <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jimpa Gyatso [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] and Chushigandru. So it was like this.   

**Q:**  In some interview, it was said that Alo Chöndze and Gombo Tashi were to start the Dokham [Tib. མདོ་ཁམས] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. Was their a different Chushigandru?   

**A:**  Now, this is exactly the same. There is nothing different about calling it Dokham. Do means the earlier Domey [Tib. མདོ་སྨད]. The Tibetan government called the [governor of Kham] the Domey Sawang. Kham refers Kham. So Dokham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> means the people in the Chushigandru. All the Khambas were between the 4 Rivers and the 6 Ranges. So its the same.   

**Q:**  When it was first started was it called Dokham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  I think it was called just <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. I don't know if this is the truth or not, but what I heard is that the name Chushigandru was by Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche. The circumstances for this name was that when the Dharma King, Chögyé Ngadag Tri Ralpachen [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ་མངའ་བདག་ཁྲི་རལ་པ་ཅན] sent his troops to Kham there were stories of how he conscripted soldiers in the Chushigandru region . So this name was used, I heard. Earlier we just called Khambas were called Khambas and Kham was called Kham, like Kham Litang, Kham Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ]. So now they need a united name that encompassed all and so it was called according to all the people in the region of four rivers and six ranges. So I don't think there is any difference. Today we are called Dokham Chushigandru in all our letters.   

**Q:**  Have you heard of Osho Pön? Last time, [question not finished]   

**A:**  I don't think it is Osho Pön, it must be Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན].   

**Q:**  I don't know, but the person who works with me had gone to Tibet last summer and he said this: Dokham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> probably sort of sent some secret telegram to Osho Pön which said "Don't send tea".   

**A:**  Oh, now this is Alo Chöndze's talk.   

**Q:**  Yes, so it said something about things can't be done peacefully so do it militantly.   

**A:**  So this is the lies of Alo Chöndze. It is a full lie, that I know.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  I feel that this was done to show his own great deeds. I have never heard about this. It is referring to Yönru Pön. I have all the pictures and everything.   

**Q:**  Yes, he called me last time saying he heard something like that. So I don't know where it's coming from.   

**A:**  No, No. It's Yönru Pön. Alo Chöndze was his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> . He is the chief [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] of our country. . He was killed by the communists. He was such a famous man. Among us, Khambas if there is one young Pön who revolted against the Chinese and fought until he died, then he is such a person. He fought from the time the Chinese came. I had a photo here but I don't know where I kept it.   

**Q:**  If later you have some photos I would like a copy.   

**A:**  I have a picture, I made a copy from Alo Chöndze's book. In 1955 the Dalai Lama went to China and on the way up the two monasteries of Litang went to Minyag Rangnakha. At first the Dalai Lama was to be invited to Litang but he could not come. It is said that the Chinese did not allow him or that the Dalai Lama himself could not come. Anyway he could not come. So all the Litangpa - the two monasteries, Litang was a large place with many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. So all went to Minyag to make preparations. There we received religious teachings and probably an Avalokitaswara [Tib. ཅན་རས་གཟིགས] Initiation, I think. All the monk and lay people joined to perform a long life ritual. Minyak is the border of Tibet and China. At that time, we also performed the ransom ritual and sent the ransom [Tib. སྐུ་གླུད] for the Dalai Lama. At that time, all the Pön and monastic people were there. Alo Chöndze had said that they had a talk [with ?]. When asked what was the talk? He said, "If I say, "Don't send the tea". means to fight and if I say "Send the tea". means not to fight". He just made it up I think. When the Dalai Lama was there all the Pön were there and we never heard anything about such talk. Whether to fight or not did not depend on Yönru Pön. Who had the decision to fight or not was in the hands of the Litang Monastery. Yönru Pön was just one Pön. In Litang we had 8 big groups, De Shogchen [Tib. སྡེ་ཤོག་ཆེན] and 16 Shogchung [Tib. ཤོག་ཆུང] and so he was just one. Whether to fight or not, to lead or not was up to the 5 chandrön and the 18 Getsang of the Litang Monastery. Like an administration the full power was in the hands of the monastery. Yönru Pön was only one pönkhag [Tib. དཔོན་ཁག]. He was indeed a bigger one but how can the decision to fight be in the hands of one person, not possible. So regarding the telegram I have not heard. Well, speaking about hearing, I was anyway young. Alo Chöndze made a story of our country at Darjeeling. There were a lot of our elderly of Litang. At that time, there were many powerful people of the monastery from the 18 Getsang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> category who were in Litang when they made the war in the beginning. At that time, those people were in India and Alo Chöndze said that he said this. So they had a fight regarding this. They said, "You Alo Chöndze are saying things that don't go in the ear. We have never heard such talk that Alo Chöndze sending command to our Yönrupön saying send and do not send tea is not at all correct. We have never heard of such talk until today. So this we are not going to write in our story". The reason why such talk was never heard of was that at that time, all of us prominent people of Litang were there and they said that "They knew exactly how the fight started. You stayed at Ü and if you want to write in the Litang history how you challenged the Chinese in Ü, then do so. But if you want to exaggerate so much then we don't want to write. It seemed that the fighting of the Litang Monastery and the farmers was depending on your orders, that's not true at all. We fought because we actually suffered under the Chinese and not because you gave the order. We have never heard of such plans". So Alo Chöndze did not come to write the Litang history and they also did not write and so we do not have this in our Litang history. Last year, Tashi Tsering from the Library gave me Alo Chöndze's book and I copied it down and brought it down [to Delhi]. So this thing is what we would say, "Absolutely a lie" . The reason is that this was something to make himself big and it's not the true story. The real truth is that places down near China were liberated peacefully and forcefully and everything. Minyag was liberated the next door. Then the Chinese stepped on our country. In English one would say, "Step by step" and they came to our country. When this happened we Litangpas have good horses and all the people were armed with guns that one bought with ones own money. So when they said to hand the arms nobody wanted to. Secondly we knew about all the suffering that they faced in the lower and borders areas and in Minyak. So every one was saying that they were going to annihilate the Buddhist faith. So when they said whether you want peaceful liberation or forceful one, we said we don't know about any of those things. We said that you say you have come to help us and so we don't know about any peaceful or forceful liberation. Finally they said that they were going to show us two roads. The white one of peaceful liberation and the black one of forceful liberation. When they said that we said we have not seen any black or white road and so you do whatever you want. So the fight started right there, at the meeting. The Chinese official were to one side and ours on another and guns were about to be drawn . At that meeting Yönrupön was not even there, only his representative. So everybody had a gun in their dress pouches and they were about to draw them while they slowly left from the meeting. The Chinese did not shoot nor arrest that day. So from that day on the relations broke off and the war started. So that was the case and said has nothing to do with the truth. So it was in reference to Yönu Pön. Yön means the left hand and ru refers to nomads. It is said that previously they used to stay left of the Lake Kokonor [Tib. མཚོ་སྔོན་པོ] and later came to our country. He was the Pön of the place called Yönru Deba [Tib. སྡེ་པ]. Presently in Dharamsala when the Dotö puts on a show they act this out . Previously in Kham when the fight was on against the Chinese, among our miser   

**A:**  He said that he was going to die fighting and he did. In Kham Litang he is a Pön known as Yönru Pön. He is a nomad of Kham Litang.   

**Q:**  Regarding the wireless. Is there a number code with Tibetan words? And when they receive it do they have an English book?   

**A:**  I don't know how they do it but I guess it will be the same. It is code numbers. For example, if it says Penjorla, then I will look for [Tib. དཔལ] and copy the number for that. Then for "jor"[Tib. འབྱོར] I will look for that number and copy that down. So now I have two group of numbers. "dpal" has 4 numbers and "'byor" has 4. So whatever number there is its in . This is copied and so the work Penjor is found. Now this has to be changed 3 times. The word number that was found cannot be send. It has to be changed and there was a way to do it. Then something that is not there is brought and added to it, and again. So this is done 3 times and then send. So when it is sent they must be receiving it the same way. For example, if it says, Penjor la went to Dehli [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་ལགས་ལྡི་ལིར་ཕྱིན་སོང]" we look for "dpal" and 'byor". For Delhi [Tib. ལྡི] is found and checked what number it corresponds to- and for "song" one sees what number it is. After the numbers are found they are multiplied once. Then new numbers are added, like adding 2 to 1 and 3 to 2. There's a way to do it. And it is finally sent. No matter how hard one tries, even if the Chinese or others hear the sound there is no way that they can break it. One can find all the additions and the multiplications but since the base is in one's mind. They teach us that and its not easy. So nobody knew. Even if the Chinese look for it- actually one can hear the sound on the radio like "tuk-tuk tuk-tuk" So thats what one hears.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that from Tibet one person went to India to meet a CIA person? Have you heard about that? Who could it be? I think he needed to talk about something?   

**A:**  This most probably must be me. I mentioned to you last time that after the camp was established at Driguthang I came . I brought [Yabshi] Trunyila with me.   

**Q:**  How? At Driguthang. One part where you came to Kolcutta with Trunyila?   

**A:**  Yes, that one! Unless they are referring to this, I have not heard any other. I think this was the one perhaps.   

**Q:**  At that time, you did meet the CIA person.   

**A:**  Yes. Trunyila was the interpreter and he was a big shot CIA man. He was not an ordinary person but one who could make decisions. He knew Chinese very well.   

**Q:**  Do you know what his name was?   

**A:**  I don't know. But it didn't matter since all the names were false. We were false and they were too. There is no one except false ones. Its all false. If an American instructor came to us they would immediately use the false name. For example, if the name is Penjorla then it is said that it is Tseringla. Its all lies. If we now look for these people with those names you can't find anyone. If we take the names of the instructors and go to look for their names today, you can't find a single one of them.   

**Q:**  You didn't find any last time?   

**A:**  I tried last time, but it was said that the names were all false. And its true too. Even our people had false names. For example when I went for training I immediately got a false name. I have a feeling that even Gyalo Thöndup did not know. Ranking people might know each other but below that, its all false. Each one covers the other.   

**Q:**  When you came to India in 1956, that same year the Dalai Lama arrived too. A petition was made, right? Who went to make this petition.   

**A:**  Therefore, earlier I told you about the group. Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, I did not know at that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Jayangshar Khenjung. As, I mentioned, the 3 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Gyetong and Ganden Bako and a few I remember. I remember Ganden Bako because he had a goiter and he was a great talker. Then there was the elderly monk Gyadotsang- uncle of Wangdü and Kesang. Then there was Andru Jinda's nephew Lodrö Phuntso. Among the Khambas there was Chantrengpa Chöndru [Tib.?], Baba Jangra Lekshey. We were 27 Litangpas.   

**Q:**  27 came to Kalimpong, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we were 27 young adults . So we all went to Delhi and made petitions. Alo Chöndze was there. When the petition was made at Nehru House, all the preparations , wrote the petition and handed it in by the elder ones. We just went and looked around and did not pay much attention. The petition was made before Nehru and so we returned.   

**Q:**  What was in the petition?   

**A:**  Oh, that I don't, basically, what was said, the gist, was that the Chinese were causing a lot of hardships in Tibet. At that time, the Chinese dropped bombs on Litang monastery. Litang, Chantreng, Ba, Nyarong [Tib. ཉག་རོང] in these places the fight was on. So referred to these battles, how people were killed, how bombs were dropped on monasteries. So I remember it had to do with that. At that time, it was also reported in the papers I think. This was at the time of the Hindu-China- Bhai-Bhai . So we didn't get help and support for our concerns.   

**Q:**  Last time, I asked Taktse Rimpoche and he did not remember very well. At Bhoth Gaya, you all were there and you stayed at the Chinese temple. Taktse Rimpoche came and wrote some story and took pictures. Do you remember any detail regarding this?   

**A:**  I don't remember anything else. I remember that Taktse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིན་པོ་ཆེ] 1. Title for an incarnate lama. 2. Term of address for incarnate lamas.">rimpoche</a> came. Regarding the taking of pictures and asking . At that time, we were young and so elderly Gyadotsang and others spoke with him. We were young, right? So thats all I remember.   

**Q:**  I asked Rimpoche and he said that he couldn't remember since it had been many years. He said at that time there were meetings about the Tibetan national anthem and flag. At that time, he said <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ཚེ་རིང] was .   

**A:**  Yes, Tashi Tsering.   

**Q:**  Was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> Tashi Tsering involved in the Dedön Tshogpa [Tib. བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ] and the like?   

**A:**  Oh, I don't really know. When you say Tashi Tsering are you talking about, the dancer, Gartru [Tib. གར་ཕྲུག] Tashi Tsering?   

**Q:**  Yes, Yes.   

**A:**  I have seen him around in Kalimpong or Darjeeling. I think it was in Darjeeling. At that time, I don't know much. Tashi Tsering was in Darjeeling learning English from Mr. Cumming or something or the colonel. This was when I got to Darjeeling. So finally he left from there to the States and it was said that he went to China.   

**Q:**  When you were at Kalimpong, there was a talk about starting a fight at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and Sharsingma, right?   

**A:**  Regarding the start of fight to prevent the Dalai Lama from returning, now this was not only in Sharsingma but also a messenger was sent to Lhasa telling the Tibetan government Magji Lekhung and Gombo Tashi to start trouble. At Lhasa itself. So I think the ones who sent this message was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and some of the Tibetan government kudra who were in India. Messengers were sent. One of them is dead but the other is in Kalimpong whose name is Losang Palden, a Litangpa who is from my region.   

**Q:**  Where is he staying in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  At Rashi road. If you ask around Kalimpong where Abo Lobsang Palden is staying, everyone will know. He is one of the persons in Kalimpong who gets involved and meddle into matters the most.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and the Independence Organization [Tib. རང་བཙན་ཙོགས་ཆུང]. So all the Tibetans know that. Along with him was Gyadotsang's servant Triley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས]. But he's dead now. In New York is Andrutsang Tsewang Phuntso who used to be called the Branch of Andrutsang, Andru Surpa [Tib, sur pa] in Shigatse. He is now in Brooklyn. One son is called Tseten [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན], the other is called Chungchung or something. I don't remember the real name. He had two such great mules and it was sent through them. I remember them leaving, since they were our companions. They were two from the group of 27. I remember this clearly because there was to be a fight in Lhasa. When they got to Lhasa it seemed that they were not able to start a war. I hear that they could not bear the responsibility and so Magji Lekhung did not agree. So we then did not have to go towards Sharsingma. So if there was war in Lhasa and we started some trouble at Shasima, then the Dalai Lama would not be able to go. So I think then they were going to tell the Dalai Lama not to return.   

**Q:**  At this time, how did the message come to you guys?   

**A:**  We got the message - it would be given through the elderly Gyadotsang and Andrutsang.   

**Q:**  Did they tell you to go?   

**A:**  It was said that we should go and we got the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, meat and butter, etc ready. Some arms that we had at that time was at Phari. When we bring them from Tibet we leave at Phari, right? We leave them with others. We went to get the arms and came down to Sharsingma and Phari area to block the road and start a fight. Most probably there were 100-200 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders.   

**Q:**  So, who were the ones who mainly instructed?   

**A:**  Mainly, along with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> there were a lot of kudra, Gyalo Thöndup and others. So must be them, right? We were told by the elderly Gyadotsang and Andrutsang Lodrö Phuntso. What we were thinking at that time was that we were itching to do something, to fight, to make something happen, because that was the reason why we came in the first place, right? So if someone said to do something, we would.   

**Q:**  When you first came from Tibet there were 27 people. Among the 27, 6 were chosen? So how was this decision made?   

**A:**  I don't know how they made the choice. I wonder if they said this and that to come or whether it was said that 6 should come - anyway, one night they said to come. I wonder if they made the choice.   

**Q:**  Now, you have to decide among yourself which persons should go, right? That 6 persons have to go.   

**A:**  We were told such and such persons to come.   

**Q:**  I see, the names were already [question not finished]   

**A:**  Names were already there. I got the message at night saying that you have to go. There was a servant of Gyadotsang, he said that I had to go now. So we discussed on the lawn saying that the 6 of us had to go and that we should not tell anyone. So the preparations for leaving at night were made.   

**Q:**  So you did not have any discussions saying - Oh, some were chosen and others were not.   

**A:**  We didn't know anything. They said the 6 should come. At that time, we were only thinking that the others were to come later. So when they said that the 6 should go, we just went.   

**Q:**  After the formation of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, there were sort of two groups formed, right? What should I say - one was to stay there and the other was to go to the outside to seek assistance.   

**A:**  Yes, we were sent to see what could be done.   

**Q:**  Was this agreed in a meeting?   

**A:**  I don't think so. This was his [Andru] own plan. We were all saying that we want to do something, to fight. So he told one group to go and get in touch with the foreign countries, with Taiwan and see what could be done. So we were sent, right? Another group stayed there.   

**Q:**  Last time, you mentioned that there were about 6 drops made.   

**A:**  Yes this was practiced.   

**Q:**  So you flew from Guam and dropped in Okinawa?   

**A:**  No, No. We stayed at Okinawa itself. We went to the airport, went up and were dropped. Then they take us by car to our residence. So the next day we would go. Like that.   

**Q:**  So the main training was at Guam?   

**A:**  Yes, if we had to parachute at Guam it would have been difficult. It was a small island and the land was not appropriate. There was danger of landing in the sea, on rocks and trees. It was a very bad place. There probably was some appropriate land but that would probably be occupied by villagers. When we looked around there were one or two villagers wearing straw hats and working in the field. When we looked from the plane the area was small. So if they drop us at the place where we lived, then it was just sea and rocks. It's very dangerous. If a strong wind blows you will land up in the sea.   

**Q:**  Yes, Yes   

**A:**  Okinawa, the land is very big. When they drop us from above, one can see the Japanese villagers clearly. When one lands then they are far away. Can't come close by since the soldiers are there. So they take us in the cars.   

**Q:**  So how was it at Okinawa? What is your daily routine and where do you stay- and the food.   

**A:**  Oh these were excellent. They bring the food. When we got to Okinawa it was probably the most pleasant. We don't have to cook and we don't have to do anything. They bring from the base.   

**Q:**  They bring from the base?   

**A:**  Yes, we were just a few people.   

**Q:**  You were all together?   

**A:**  Yes, in one house. We were 6 in one house and Taktse Rimpoche and others were at another. So they bring the food.   

**Q:**  So you make your own food?   

**A:**  They bring, ready to eat with steams. Probably, they were bringing from the base near by.   

**Q:**  I see, ready made.   

**A:**  The military base must be somewhere and so they bring in a car.   

**Q:**  What is the daily routine? Do you get up at one time?   

**A:**  In the morning we get up at 5:30.   

**Q:**  You have to?   

**A:**  Yes. Not on Sundays. You can sleep as long as you like.   

**Q:**  Does someone come to wake you up?   

**A:**  Yes. There is the bugle call. They have it installed in the barrack. I think this is the same all over America . Later, when I went to see the Colorado training it was the same. I went to a large base and they did the same at 5:30. Then we do a quick wash and do exercises for about an hour. Then wash up and have breakfast. Then class begins. Thats it.   

**Q:**  You have classes?   

**A:**  Yes. To send wireless it is mostly classes. Other than that there are classes for assembly, disassembly of guns. They write on the board. Then the instructor puts the gun on the table and shows us what to do and we do alike with our guns. They teach us the name and number of the various parts of the gun and bullets. So when it came to shooting it was just target practice. Then how to clean and what happens after shooting so many bullets, etc.   

**Q:**  So not only shooting but what about others.   

**A:**  They teach us map-making and there is a lot to learn about how to start an organization, whether it is a secret organization or guerilla.   

**Q:**  Then do you learn sabotage, ambush?   

**A:**  Yes, everything. When one learns guerilla warfare then sabotage, ambush, demolition team. For example, if you had 10 in a team, then you would have 3 for demolition. How to explode bombs. When one has to get everything ready then- you have the bomb, I have the cap and somebody else has the wire. And so the three of us has to run. You will install the bomb, I the wire and somebody the cap. So everybody actually has to know that. Now the 7 others have to keep watch. Then how to ambush in guerilla warfare. Then in sabotage, there are many types of bombs. Ones that explode under wheels, by thin rope which you cannot see. But if you trip it with your legs or a car it explodes. So we did all these training.   

**Q:**  Now the two of you were trained and so in Tibet you were to train others?   

**A:**  The two of us learned how to throw grenades, sabotage bridges and motorable roads, etc. To shoot cannons. So we taught them the things that were dropped by the plane. They were able to put some to use. As far as the cannons are concerned they used everything, until the shells were used up. When they drop a cannon they also drop about 100 bullets - not more than that. They drop about 10 boxes containing about 10 shells. So it's easy to shoot 100 shells. All you do is load and pull the trigger- that was easy, right? So thats it.   

**Q:**  So in Tibet you were teaching other people, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Actually, you were to start an organization and teach others?   

**A:**  We teach the others. If they decide to go then they go -otherwise they will send others [ note: unclear incomplete sentence] When we were there my companion taught cannons, and this pulling string - I was better in the wireless. He was good in teaching those and he taught a lot.   

**Q:**  How many people were taught?   

**A:**  About 100, I think - to throw grenades and hand bombs. I think there were about 12 to 13 who learned to fire cannons. I taught about 6 of them.   

**Q:**  Which place was this in?   

**A:**  At Lhagyari. Then at Nyén [Tib. གཉན]. There was a place close to Nyén Lhuntse Dzong. Places where there were no villagers and uninhabited places.   

**Q:**  At Okinawa, when you spoke to Taktse Rimpoche you said that you wanted to go to Kham, right?   

**A:**  We were thinking of going to Kham and never had the idea of going to Ü. Later they said we had to go to Ü.   

**Q:**  Did Taktse Rimpoche say that everyone has to work together?   

**A:**  He said we must go to Ü. So we thought a lot about it and it seemed quite all right. There was a group going to Kham and at Ü there was the organization of Gombo Tashi. So we finally thought that this was the correct thing to do. So we went. At first, we were thinking of going to Kham - what are we going to do at Ü - it never occurred to us to fight there. What we had said from the beginning is that we were going to fight in Kham. That our country was fighting the communist and they had no arms and so we needed arms. So this was our goal.   

**Q:**  Finally, Taktse Rimpoche and a better trainer met with the two of you, right?   

**A:**  Not really a meeting - more like an advise now that it was time to go. Without Taktse Rimpoche we did not know the language.   

**Q:**  Now there was another one right, An American?   

**A:**  Which one?   

**Q:**  Finally, you had a sort of a meeting, in which you said that you will finally go to Ü.   

**A:**  Yes, so we agreed. Now that was it. There was nothing more to say. The training was completed. Whichever place we went, what we were supposed to do was the same. So what was said before leaving concerned the contacts to be made and how to meet. Other than that there was nothing else to say. That's it.   

**Q:**  The reason I am asking you this is that last time you said that you, Lotse, Taktse Rimpoche and a better trainer met. I wanted to ask you what he said?   

**A:**  Now we had decided to go to Ü to meet Gombo Tashi and through him Phala Drönyerchemmo. So what he said was this, "To find out what their plan was. And to keep them informed whether it could be put it into action and about the achievements of the mission". Unless they said that- there wasn't anything else to say. Before I went into the plane, I think he may have been a brigadier of sorts - he was called Mr. Mack. I doubt if his name was actually Mack. Anyway, he was high ranking. Before we left for East Pakistan, he shook hands and told two us, "Take care, if the time came when America would be fighting in Tibet, my feet will be the first to drop out of the plane". I don't know whether he actually meant it or was just encouragement, I don't know. It must have been- because his type of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུག; རུ་ཁག; ch. 队] A large administrative unit in Tibetan communes that consisted of several villages. The full name for brigade was &quot;production brigade&quot; (tib. ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁང; ch. 生产队), although most Tibetans just used the abbreviation &quot;ruga.&quot; In Tibet, communes/brigades were initiated primarily in the late 1960s.">brigade</a> were the ones who were kind of volunteers. Later, when I went to the States, when I was at Colorado, he was the one in charge. Anyway, at that time if the Americans were going to send people, I guess his kind would be the ones.   

**Q:**  Last time, when I spoke with Taktse Rimpoche, he had contacts very early on. In 1950-51. He thought that at first things seemed okay, but later, he said that it seemed that they needed information and it seemed like we were being used. That's what he told me. At that time, in Okinawa, did Taktse Rimpoche tell you anything? Like, they were not doing well or- At that time, how were the American teachers? Were they treating you well or were they saying that things are not going okay and scolding you -so what were they saying?   

**A:**  At that time, we didn't know the language and so we don't hear much, right? However, on the one hand from the intelligence work it seemed that the Americans were doing correctly. If one looks from the point of our wishes, then we were not satisfied. The reason being that when we told them that we wanted something immediately, they would say, "It must be done according to the situation". For example if our work was not exact-then they would not . So they were saying that they needed a lot of information. What they needed was what the Chinese were doing, where they were going, etc. So it seems that they needed such information. Now if we did not tell them then I don't think they would have helped us. For example, if we needed to help someone- for example even today its like that. If you ask the Tibetan government to give you a loan, they will say - you want to build a house and get a loan for that and so what is your goal. Now if you can't show the goal exactly what you are up to, the Tibetan government is not going to loan you any money, right? So it's like that. So unless they examine what we said we are going to do, they are not going to back instantly. They needed to see what we were going to do. We went to our country and there were only two of us. We did the work. Gombo Tashi worked hard and so did the Chushigandru. We all did. We went to Lhoka and contacted the Americans, they helped with arms and agreed to train us. They dropped arms over us. So when they did that I don't think they are to be blamed. Of course, we can say they used us but they are helping us for some reason right? In todays world if a person had no food to eat and they say poor thing and give a relief, that's one thing. But politically, no one will without considering their own benefits help the others? So thinking from this perspective, even we were at odds at times. We were not satisfied with the American training. We said we don't need to learn how to shoot these lousy guns, we know it already. Before we came from Tibet we knew how to shoot. Now when one examines carefully, we actually did not know. We know how to shoot, to pull the trigger- but we have to know how to assemble, disassemble, about bullets. Now if one needed bullets for a gun you can't say just a bullet. We have to say we need bullets with this number. For example, there is the 303 rifle, the large rifles that the Indians carry. So when one says 303 rifle everyone knows. If one need bullets for this gun, everyone knows. Its the same with cannons. If one needs 50 calumber then one gets the exact one.   

**Q:**  Regarding the provision of arms do they give you arms that are used in the area or do they give you the latest equipment.   

**A:**  At first, from the perspective of intelligence, they give us arms that are in existence in Tibet. Actually if one examines the situation we were not as yet prepared to stand on our own and so would not raise any suspicion from the Chinese side. Later, after the Dalai Lama came to India, when there was full scale revolt in Tibet, they gave all the arms. They dropped MR rifle and MR machine gun. They gave us the US world war II arms. So this was what was generally used by the Americans, right? They gave arms and ammunition and everything. For example at Mustang] it was all MR rifle. During our time they gave us 303 rifle. The reason was that the British had given a lot to the Tibetan government and so there were many in Tibet as well as in India. So it was for this reason. The way I see it is that this was done for intelligence reasons and not because they did not want to give. For example, what they were telling us was that for the time being do not fight the Chinese but to form an organization. Until the organization is formed and gained some power, it would be useless to fight. So what they said was really true. If we went to fight, then it was not the correct thing to do. If we went to fight we had 100 bullets and the Chinese had 1000 so there was no way right? So when I look from this point of view, their intelligence security were absolutely shrewd. For example, when one is dropped from the plane, they will not allow us to wear new clothes. Otherwise, people will notice. Even arms are made to look used. Actually it is new. But our people did not like that because they could not think along these lines. They sort of said, " Oh, sending such arms. Do you think we don't have new clothes to wear in Tibet?"   

**Q:**  So the Americans trainer did not show dissatisfaction?   

**A:**  No, they did not say anything. Now, we won't know if they told Taktse Rimpoche something or not. We did not know the language. Besides there was nothing to be dissatisfied about. If we learned what they taught us, then we learned. If not, then there is nothing that they can do.   

**Q:**  From Okinawa you went once again to East Pakistan. When you arrived there you said last time that there were American soldiers, about 400-500.   

**A:**  Yes there were. I think it was more than 500.   

**Q:**  Were they the usual US soldiers or were they CIA?   

**A:**  Now, that we would not know.   

**Q:**  Was it just for our cause?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes. I think it was just for us because - for example the air-strip was all grassland. It seems to have been a World War II strip. When we went to Tibet and landed it was all on the grass. On both sides of the strip they had tin cans of kerosene. These were lit and so they land between these cans. There were no lights or signals. Later, as I saw it again, it was the same field, but they improved it and made all the preparations to drop arms and ammunitions. So they had control of the whole place and all it was all ready for war.   

**Q:**  Were the soldiers staying there too.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  And they had places to stay?   

**A:**  Yes, complete.   

**Q:**  And you stayed there for few days right?   

**A:**  Yes, a day or so .   

**Q:**  So if there were more than 500, then they were all staying there.   

**A:**  Yes. They were.   

**Q:**  And they had an arms depot there?   

**A:**  Yes, the whole thing. The barracks were made from iron sheets. So I used to say that they have built the whole thing. Later, I went to Tibet and again when we, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> went that way again in 59-1960, they had made a fantastic place. And they had put lights out for the planes. I think there were lights. There was place to play ball and volleyball, the whole works. There were many soldiers. So I can't say that all this was for us or for some other reason. But I think it was more or less for us. The supply line was from Okinawa. For example, during the wireless communication they were going to drop arms for 4,000 persons in just one day. We didn't accept it. We kept losing ground and people ran away and didn't stay. Otherwise there were two planes each dropping arms and ammunitions for 2,000 persons.   

**Q:**  Yes, you said that you kept losing ground. You have to make a lot of preparations for the drop zones right?   

**A:**  Oh yes, a lot. There are so many things to get ready. First you have to find out for how many kilometers the wind is going to blow the chute. You have to indicate how strong the wind is. If our field was such and such size and if it was dropped here then how far is the wind going to carry it. Can the plane drop the items from here to there in two minutes. Suppose it was dropped within 5 minute then how far will the plane be in 5 minutes. Actually they drop within 1 minute.   

**Q:**  How do you know the speed of the wind?   

**A:**  You will know the speed of the wind even by throwing a feather in the air.   

