# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0043.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsarong Rimshi [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི], whose personal name was Dündül Namgyal [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], was a well-known Western-educated Tibetan official from one of the richest and most important aristocratic families. He was the son of Tsarong Dzasa, the architect of the program of military and infrastructural modernization after the 13th Dalai Lama returned from exile in India in 1913. In this interview, he discusses Chinese trade with India and the new Chinese banking system. He also discusses the creation of a Procurement Office in Lhasa which ordered many Indian goods through Tibetan traders including Tsarong. He describes how the Tibetan Government also set up a Granary Office and asked many Kudrak to help them by supplying grain and money. He also discusses inflation in Lhasa after the Chinese arrived and about how families such as his were selling houses to the Chinese. He also talks about the Chinese installation of telephones, hospitals and hygiene, as well as locally trained paramedics for rural areas.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0043_02/H_0043_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Yesterday, we talked about the bank. The Chinese opened banks in Lhasa, Shigatse and Gyantse, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Why did they open them?   

**A:**  At that time a lot of trade was being done, so probably there was difficulty and trouble when they had to pay the money back and forth because there was a danger of the money getting lost on the way. So the Chinese set up the Bank of China in Calcutta and they had a lot of money over there. They were sending drafts from Lhasa to Calcutta back and forth. They had also certainly set up the banks in Shigatse and Gyantse, but I don't know where they set them up. I already told you about the bank in Lhasa. I also heard that they had set up a bank in Phari. At that time, Lachung [Tib. བླ་ཆུང] [Note: must be Tsarong's trader] also sent checks from Phari to me.   

**Q:**  Could people open accounts in the bank?   

**A:**  Yes, they could.   

**Q:**  Were there people opening accounts in those banks? Did you use the bank?   

**A:**  We didn't open a checking account and write checks like we do here because we didn't know Chinese characters and the language. We had to write Chinese in the bank and we also didn't know the system of the bank. So we had to ask other people's help to write the things in the bank. But when there was money to receive, they would tell us to come to receive the money.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the bank give loans?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about lending money. Probably, they were lending money if people left something as pawn. I didn't do that and I didn't hear about other people doing that.   

**Q:**  Didn't Pandatsang and some people set up a kind of Trade Sentry Gate?   

**A:**  This was in Kalimpong. I am not sure, but there was that kind of thing.   

**Q:**  In some of the books, it was written that there was a Trade Sentry Gate between the Chinese and Tibetans and all of the trade had to go through this.   

**A:**  All of the trade didn't need to go through this. For example, when we sent our things, we didn't go through that. They had set up their own traders for importing steel sheets and iron and that kind of stuff and probably they also needed some cement. The traders did large scale trade and the capital was probably from the Chinese themselves. Pandatsang was there and there might be some traders also doing that trade. Regarding this, you should ask Chöndze Gushab [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས]. He knew all about this.   

**Q:**  You talked about the Government Procurement Office [Tib. མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་ཁུངས]. What was that for?   

**A:**  This was in Lhasa. I already told you about that. It was held in the old Tsarong House [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རྙིང་པ].   

**Q:**  It didn't get recorded.   

**A:**  Previously the house belonged to us, but we sold it to Netöpa [Tib. སྣེ་སྟོད་པ]. Probably, Netöpa sold it to Pandatsang and Pandatsang stayed there for a long time. When they had the trouble and the soldiers surrounded them, Panda was living in that house. Later, this house belonged to Taktra Labrang. Probably Panda sold it. Later, the Chinese were living there and they set up the Procurement Office there.   

**Q:**  Was that office in charge of supplying what the Chinese needed?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that for only inside Tibet? Or did they send goods to China?   

**A:**  I am not sure, but probably it was Tibet only. This office ordered things through the traders.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival, what did they need?   

**A:**  They needed a lot of things like iron and steel sheets for the construction of the roofs of their houses. They also needed a variety of Indian goods like nails, toothpaste, toothbrushes, blades, and cigarettes for supplying the Chinese soldiers.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese smoke Indian cigarettes?   

**A:**  Yes, they did because at the beginning it was not easy for them to transport things from China. So they just ordered goods from India such as vehicles and parts of vehicles, and chairs and cloth.   

**Q:**  What did you import for the Procurement Office?   

**A:**  They ordered a lot of things, like iron rods, chairs, steel sheets, vehicle parts, a truck and a light car, watches and fountain pens.   

**Q:**  Did they buy a lot of things like watches?   

**A:**  Yes, they would buy about 100 pieces.   

**Q:**  To whom did you have to hand in the watches?   

**A:**  To the Procurement office. They also bought the overcoat materials produced from Italy. We got a good profit from those goods.   

**Q:**  Was there a Chinese trade Sentry Gate in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, they set up a Chinese Trade Agent [Tib. ཚོང་དོན་ལས་ཁུངས] in Kalimpong which was dealing exclusively with trade. Pandatsang was also doing something there. Probably, they had a kind of Sentry Gate. I am not sure whether Sandu [Tib. ས་འདུ] was [also] there or not.   

**Q:**  In the early times, people were trading in Tibet, so what kind of reforms took place after the Chinese arrived in terms of trade?   

**A:**  The reforms were like what I told you about them buying watches and pens. In the early times, the Kudrak and some traders who couldn't go to India were just buying a few watches and pens. There weren't any people buying a large quantity of those things. After the Chinese arrival, they bought large quantities of watches and pens. Some of the traders brought about 1,000 watches and pens. They also brought a lot of bicycles. We also bought bicycles for the Procurement Office. Normally they would order 50-100 bicycles, and foodstuffs, and vehicle parts and many other things.   

**Q:**  It was said that after the Chinese arrived, the prices of foodstuffs rapidly rose and there was inflation, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Why did the inflation occur?   

**A:**  It was because many Chinese soldiers came. At that time they might have brought some food, but it wasn't enough to last forever, so they borrowed from the Tibetan Government. At that time the Tibetan government set up a Granary Office [Tib. འབྲུ་ཁང་ལས་ཁུངས] and all the high ranking and better off officials were gathered there and said that they are going to work in the Granary Office.   

**Q:**  Before that, there wasn't any office called the granary, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was a newly set up office held in the house called Phodrang Sarpa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ] near Ragashag's House. This house was built during the 13th Dalai Lama's time by Künphel la in 1928-29. Later it belonged to Taktra Labrang and Taktra Rimpoche stayed there. There were many officials working there like Künphel la. They held meetings where they [the granary office officials] said, "We have problems concerning food, so we request the government to help us and we also request the Kudrak who have large estates to help us voluntarily." Ngabö also might have attended the meeting and probably they made [some decisions]. They said that they wanted about 1,000 khe of barley and 1,000 dotse of money and they cornered each person and asked, "How much are you going to give? So when some others offered this amount, the others would have to offer something and say that I will offer this much. Then they just issued a receipt saying that they received such and such amount and we will repay that in the future. At that time, our family said that we don't have barley to offer so we offered 2,000 dotse and they issued us a receipt. All the bigger kudrak households offered 2,000-3,000-4,000-5,000 khe of barley. They also took out some grain from the government granaries. At that time barley became scares because many people came to eat it. So the price went up very high. When the Chinese needed grain, they bought it right away from the market and paid a very high price. Food was precious, so they paid a high price because of the emergency.   

**Q:**  When the Granary Office told people that they want the grain, did they offer it voluntarily and happily?   

**A:**  They didn't offer it happily. They purposely gathered the people there and it was like doing an auction and making people challenge each other [Tib. ཞེ་སྡང་སློང་མཁན]. They asked the people how much they are going to offer. So they would be embarrassed if they didn't offer much and they will say, "This big Kudrak didn't offer much." So all of them gave up whatever they had and offered it to them.   

**Q:**  Do you remember how much our household offered?   

**A:**  As I mentioned above, we offered 2,000 dotse.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the price of all goods go up?   

**A:**  Yes, Especially the price of barley and butter went up. Probably before the Chinese arrived, one khe of barley was 15-16 sang. Then it went up to 20-30-40-70-80 sang and even over 130-140-150 sang.   

**Q:**  Did the prices of the other things also go up?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did the prices of the tea and butter go up?   

**A:**  The prices of tea and butter all went up. At that time, the Chinese paid a lot of money as if they were happy-go-lucky because it was their government's money and not their own money. So they didn't have kind of loyalty and they didn't try to save money. Secondly, the Chinese might have been thinking that if a person got 100 dayan, he can't eat it or squander it . So we can get it back when the reforms would be implemented in the future. They might have been thinking that way.   

**Q:**  At that time, the trade was also good, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, when the prices of the foodstuffs went up, were there any people complaining about this?   

**A:**  Yes. The humble poor people complained a lot. But they didn't hold demonstrations. Gradually, the trade was good and all people had an abundance of money from trading and from working on building roads. Therefore, even when the prices of the foodstuffs went up, it was okay for them.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrived, were there many people working for the Chinese on construction?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. At that time, people couldn't find masons to hire and their wages also went up. Outwardly, the economy seemed to have developed.   

**Q:**  Who were the people working on the roads? Were they miser? At that time, most of them had to stay in the countryside and work for the estates because the old system was still there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but they didn't have any farming during the winter and there were also many jobless people. So they went for road building. I heard that the Chinese paid wages by measuring the number of square meters [completed].   

**Q:**  When the prices of foodstuffs went up, what kind of people had a hard time and didn't like the situation? Were they the traders or the miser?   

**A:**  When the prices of the foodstuffs went up, the humble poor people had a hard time temporarily and the traders also had a hard time.   

**Q:**  But at that time, the traders got better trading than before, right?   

**A:**  The trading didn't get better all of a sudden. Gradually it became better because it took many months to go to buy the goods. At that time, the people in the monasteries didn't like the Chinese and they didn't go to work for the Chinese and there were many other people who didn't like the Chinese. Basically, people didn't like the Chinese, but when they heard that the Chinese were paying good wages for road building they went for road building and they bought things like new fur caps called Tsering Kyinkab [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྐྱིན་ཁེབ] and new chupa and they drank chang and they were kind of happy at that time. When people got a lot of money, food, drink and good clothes, they would get duped and they won't know any other things and they won't think about politics.   

**Q:**  In the years 1951-52-53-54, did the situation remain the same where the prices of the foodstuffs went up and the trade got more developed? Or did it decline?   

**A:**  Later, it declined.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  For example, in 1956-1957 it was okay, but after that the people who were buying watches and pens became less. And then the disturbance took place in 1958. So all people were kind of scared and they didn't do much trading and some of the Chinese were also sent back. They also stopped the construction and the goods that they ordered also decreased. In 1959, it was finished.   

**Q:**  In the years 1951-52-53-54-56, the Chinese trade policy didn't change, right?   

**A:**  Probably, the trade policy changed a little bit because after the highway was built, the Chinese brought their necessities like cigarette and sweets from China.   

**Q:**  In 1950, most of the trade was done with India, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, the trade with China didn't develop, right?   

**A:**  Probably, it got developed because they transported a large quantity of Indian goods to China. At that time, they didn't need that much in Lhasa. Each trader brought several thousands of tubes of toothpaste and toothbrushes. They transported these to China. I heard that razors were very scarce in China so thousands and thousands of razors were brought to China. You should ask Ongkar. He has a lot to tell you about the Sentry Gate. He had a close relationship with the Chinese and he used to come to me also. He supplied the Chinese with a lot of goods.   

**Q:**  Some people said that the Chinese discounted the prices of the goods like tea that they brought from China even if they suffered a loss because of the inflation.   

**A:**  Probably.   

**Q:**  Did you hear anything about this?   

**A:**  I don't know clearly about this. But they did that.   

**Q:**  What do you mean they did that?   

**A:**  The Chinese brought a lot of things like tea from down there. This was for winning over the people. Probably, they did that at one time.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese set up an office in charge of agriculture and animal husbandry?   

**A:**  They didn't set up those things in the beginning. In April 1956, the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up and then many departments [Ch. qu] like the Construction Department [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན་ལས་ཁུངས], the Animal Husbandry Department [Tib. ནོར་ཕྱུགས་ལས་ཁུངས], and the Financial Department [Tib. ནོར་སྲིད་ལས་ཁུངས] [were created]. After that, the Chinese might have helped the people on these things and they also did some technical training for the animal husbandry farms, some of which were successful. But I heard that some of them didn't accept the Chinese methods saying that it work out if we did that because of the local situation.   

**Q:**  Where did the Chinese do that ?   

**A:**  Probably, it was in the areas near Lhasa like Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] and Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Did they use it [technical methods] for farming or animal husbandry?   

**A:**  They used it for the crops saying that you should plant winter wheat and many other things. And they were talking about the climate and way of planting, but the people said it didn't work out.   

**Q:**  According to the communist system, it was to help the miser. So did they [Chinese] lend barley to the miser?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this. They didn't lend barley loans because they didn't have enough barley for themselves.   

**Q:**  Did they help them with new farming tools like plows?   

**A:**  Later on, after 1956, probably they brought some farming tools. They didn't have it before that. Before that, I heard that the Chinese soldiers didn't have work, so they sent their soldiers to the farmers to help them during the harvest because they needed many people at that time. This was also done because they could help the farmers and, on the other hand, if the farmers would get a good yield, it would be beneficial for them [Chinese] also. It was for their mutual benefit.   

**Q:**  I am going to ask you about communications. In December 1954, the Xinjiang-Lhasa highway and the highway from Chamdo and another one from Qinghai to Lhasa was also built. When did they start building the highways?   

**A:**  Right after liberation. Their first thought was to build the (motor) roads. I heard that they build the road right away from down there. At that time, the road building was very difficult and they had to cross many very high mountain passes, narrow passages along the river and rivers at high altitude. So it was very difficult. It was almost impossible. But the Chinese sent many people from down there and built the highway. They started doing that in 1951 and probably, it took about 3 years. I heard that about 10,000 Chinese died in the road building and many Tibetans also died when they were blowing up the rocks. The vehicles arrived at Lhasa in the winter of 1954. They had a very hard time when they built the road through Ganzi [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས], Derge Trola [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་ཁྲོ་ལ] and Chamdo and through Kongpo. In the northern area, they build a little bit from Siling, but otherwise most of the places were covered by pastures and they drove the vehicle on the pastureland and there weren't many bridges also. They just filled the streams with stones and drove the vehicles on it. We went down like this. The mountain passes were also kind of flat, because it was very high altitude and the roads were all muddy. The trucks they got from the Guomindang were the American GMC trucks. They drove about 5 miles per hour.   

**Q:**  The road was not very good, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time if they loaded their trucks with petrol from China, when they reached Lhasa, probably, all of the petrol would be used up. If they counted the cost of the petrol, the price of the goods they brought from China would have had to be very high. But, they didn't calculate that.   

**Q:**  No matter that the road was not good, they could transport a lot of goods from China, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they could.   

**Q:**  Many trucks came to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  At the beginning, the trucks came from the north and the east. At that time, they just built a kind of flat place on the pasture called Lubu Nader [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག་ན་སྡེར] at the front of Potala Palace. All of the trucks were loaded with gunny sacks. Probably, it was foodstuffs. There were almost 500-600 trucks lined up on the pasture there. After that, when their bigger supply convoys came, there were about 300 trucks arriving on the plain [open space] at the front of our house called Polinga [Tib. སྤོ་གླིང་ག]. We sold the plain [flat area] to the Chinese. They also built a storeroom in that place. The smaller convoys had about 20-25 trucks and the middle convoys had around 100-150 trucks.   

**Q:**  Did Polinga belong to our family?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You sold it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time they bargained a lot and finally we sold it for 10,000 dayan. They said that it would be good to deposit the money in the bank so that you can get the interest, so we put the money in a kind of certificate of deposit. Probably, it was a kind of a government security. Each year, we had to take off a kind of stamp-like perforated paper and probably they were going to pay a yearly interest. But we didn't have the time to get the interest.   

**A:**  Similarly, did the government and other Tibetans also sell houses and spaces?   

**A:**  Yes. Yuthok House was sold and I heard they paid a lot of money for that. The Chinese paid with a bank check and I heard that they [the sellers] could take all the money down here [to India].   

**Q:**  Normally, people would not sell spaces [parks, meadows] to outsiders. If you sold the space to the Chinese, it was like giving them the space for good, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We gave up the space. Everyone didn't have any choice but to let it go because the Chinese had occupied all the Tibetan territories. Some of the sellers might have thought to sell the house and run away. Some of them might have thought of converting everything into money and then eat good food and enjoy oneself. Some religious people might have thought of converting things into money and then stay in a quite place and practice religion and give alms to the monks before they die. Some of them might have thought to convert everything into money and go to India and do bigger trading.   

**Q:**  In some of the states in India, when someone came from another state they are not allowed to use land spaces, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Didn't it mention in the 17-Point Agreement that the Chinese were not allowed to buy empty spaces in the Tibet Autonomous Region?   

**A:**  The government was not saying anything, and sellers were just selling them right away and buyers also bought them right away.   

**Q:**  The Chinese built the roads, but did they also install telephones?   

**A:**  Do you mean for their internal lines?   

**Q:**  I mean installing telephones in Lhasa.   

**A:**  They had installed telephones for their internal use.   

**Q:**  Did their the long distance lines reach to Beijing?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether they had telephone or not, but they had the [wireless] radios.   

**Q:**  So there weren't any phone lines installed for the Tibetans, right?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether they had a public telegraph office. We didn't need to send telegraphs, so we didn't send telegraphs.   

**Q:**  If a person living in Lhasa would go to the Chinese phone company and say that he wants to make a call to Shigatse, could he do that?   

**A:**  I never made such calls. Probably it was possible. At that time, our household didn't install a telephone.   

**Q:**  Did you hear that other people had telephones?   

**A:**  I never heard about that. At that time, many Chinese offices were operating in the Kudrak's [former] houses. They had their telephone and the Army had their telephones. Some of them just had some temporary military phones with the wires which were used on the battlefield.   

**Q:**  So most of the telephones were for the Chinese internal lines and the Kudrak households and the traders didn't have telephones, right?   

**A:**  Yes, [but] they installed electricity in our house.   

**Q:**  Did they use a generator?   

**A:**  At first it was via a generator. When I was there, they hadn't build the big power station. Even up to when the revolt took place it hadn't been built.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese set up hospitals in Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did they set them up?   

**A:**  One was set up from the beginning at Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག]. I have been there once. Later, it was called the People's Hospital [Tib. མི་དམངས་སྨན་ཁང] and the new hospital was behind Jangsebshar [Tib. ལྕང་གསེབ་ཤར] where Yabshi [Taktse], the family of the 14th Dalai Lama was located. That place where the hospital was built was called Gönsebshar [Tib. མགོན་གསེབ་ཤར].   

**Q:**  When did they build this?   

**A:**  Probably they started building it in 1956 and the opening ceremony was held in August of 1957. Our late mother died in July 1957, so I remember this clearly. We donated her bed and mattress to the hospital. The hospital was opened at the end of July or beginning of August.   

**Q:**  Apart from the hospital, what else did the Chinese do for the people in terms of hygiene? Did they do anything like keeping the roads clean and making places for putting garbage?   

**A:**  When I was there, they didn't do anything like this. Probably they told people at meetings to keep the place clean, but they didn't place garbage cans. The Chinese also set up the traffic police.   

**Q:**  Did they educate people through movies about hygiene and child-birth and those things?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They showed movies about winning the war and how people welcomed them when the cooperatives were set up and about praising Chairman Mao and military drills.   

**Q:**  What else did they do in terms of hygiene? Did the hospital have an ambulance?   

**A:**  No, it didn't.   

**Q:**  Did they have vaccinations?   

**A:**  Probably they had. At that time, they didn't need to give vaccinations very much because almost no one was getting smallpox before the Chinese arrival. At that time, there wasn't any vaccination for polio and measles in Tibet. These were new diseases in this place.   

**Q:**  At that time, were many people going to the Chinese hospital?   

**A:**  Yes. Many people went to the hospital and they gave them the treatment. They also roughly trained some doctors for about 6 months and sent them to the countryside like [to places like] Nyetang and Chushul.   

**Q:**  Did anybody from our household go to the Chinese hospital?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. When my late mother was sick, we called the Chinese doctor to our house.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the hospital?   

**A:**  I went once. This was in the early times before they built the new hospital. I didn't go to the new hospital. At that time, the old Chinese hospital was said to be good, so I went there once. It was also quite big and there were Tibetan patients there. Some of the patients were carried on stretchers.   

**Q:**  Why did you go there?   

**A:**  At that time, I had pimples on my face. So I went there and they took out many CC of blood from the vein of my arm and just transfused it to the muscle of my arm. They didn't give me any medicine. I didn't notice what effect it had on me.   

**Q:**  Being the People's Hospital, it was free, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

