# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0043.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kalimpong, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsarong Rimshi [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི], whose personal name was Dündül Namgyal [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], was a well-known Western-educated Tibetan official from one of the richest and most important aristocratic families. He was the son of Tsarong Dzasa, the architect of the program of military and infrastructural modernization after the 13th Dalai Lama returned from exile in India in 1913. In this interview, he talks about going to Kalimpong to work on importing electric equipment in 1951-52. In general, he talks about the Tibetan Trade Mission in Kalimpong, their duties, and some names of the members working under Jenkhentsisum. He discusses building the Dogde Power Station and later building the Shangthab Power House with the help of the Mr. Fox and Aufschnaiter. The Tibetan Government sanctioned the plan and the requirements were ordered through the firm Gilber Gilkes Gordon Limited. He also discussed how the Power Station plan had to be stopped and the orders were cancelled.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0043_04/H_0043_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You came to Kalimpong around 1950 right?   

**A:**  I came in 1950 and stayed all of 1951.   

**Q:**  So during 1951, what was the scene here in Kalimpong with the Tibetan officials, the Trade representative? Who was around here?   

**A:**  Around 1950. Well, I have to think as I can't tell you off hand. I think the Trade representative was Kungö Khenjung.   

**Q:**  Which khenjung?   

**A:**  Wasn't his name Lobsang Gyentsen?   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  I think so [MCG Note: it is not, he came later]. At that time Surkhang Kungö was here, but he may have already returned. I don't recall. The Trade representative bought a house, the kuti down below.   

**Q:**  The one near Convent school? So was that the Trade representative?   

**A:**  Yes. It was in that house.   

**Q:**  Now regarding the Trade representative, was it just a trade representative or was it also considered a Bureau Office [Tib. thönjö] [of the government] dealing with Tibetan affairs?   

**A:**  They must have done some thönjö work on the side.   

**Q:**  During this time there wasn't any office that was especially called a thönjö?   

**A:**  No there was not. At that time, it was not called the Trade Representative but the Trade Mission.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was at Yadong in 1950, there was a Shakabpa Mission, right? To talk with foreign countries.   

**A:**  Yes. Taring Kungö Dzasa was there.   

**Q:**  Yes, it seems that there were quite a few of them. Now regarding the starting of an organization in Kalimpong. I doubt there was one in 1951, 52 or 53.   

**A:**  Sure there was.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  There was.   

**Q:**  The Jenkhentsisum organization?   

**A:**  It had started by around 51. Even if they had not fully started there must have been someone who was working here. [NOTE: he is incorrect]   

**Q:**  Kungö Gyalo Thondup was in Taiwan in 1950, right? In 1951 he was in the States and then he stayed in Darjeeling for just a while and then went up to Lhasa in 1952. At that time, you were here. And wasn't the Dalai Lama's mother, the Gyayum Chemmo [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡུམ་ཆེན་མོ] here too?   

**A:**  I think she went back around 1951.   

**Q:**  Anyway it must have been after the 17-Point Agreement right?   

**A:**  She must have left in 1951 or the beginning of 1952.   

**Q:**  So therefore at that time there was an organization here in Kalimpong that had Khenjung and Shakabpa.   

**A:**  During that time I doubt there was an organization, but I don't know for sure. We were working on the electrical project so I went to Gangtok and Kalimpong and Calcutta. We were very busy.   

**Q:**  So this must have started later, right? If Gyalo Thondup was in it, then he returned from Tibet only in 1952 right. So they must have started in 1953-54.   

**A:**  Yes, it must have been around then.   

**Q:**  If it did start then, then was it mainly the three of them? People say Jenkhentsisum usually, right.   

**A:**  Yes. Then there also was Phünkang and Yuthok.   

**Q:**  Therefore Phünkang and Yuthok. Then it is said that the Drunyichemmo Angula was also there.   

**A:**  Then there was Alo Chöndze and Shelkar Chandzö.   

**Q:**  So what were they? Some groups came later. right?   

**A:**  They must have been together. Then there was. I forget his name, he worked for us. Abo Thösam.  

**Q:**  Abo Thösam was in it too?   

**A:**  It's said that he was. Later, they were separate. Then much later, when they worked on a broad scale, that must have been at the end of 1956, they got signatures from everybody. Also the Dalai Lama came down [to India] and then returned. After that, there must have been many people in Chushigandru. Then those who worked earlier were sort of staying on the outside, and it is said that there were some misunderstandings.   

**Q:**  How? What do you mean those who were working earlier?   

**A:**  The earlier ones like Phünkang and Yuthok. From the inner circle, it seems like they were sort of a bit on the outside. Maybe.   

**Q:**  During this time did your father and yourself, go to any meetings?   

**A:**  I have not been to any. After the uprising in 1959, I went to a meeting. Then there was nothing to meet about except to talk what happened and that we had to go to Delhi to demonstrate. So all the representatives bought their own tickets and were led by Lukhangwa. Shakabpa came, so did Phünkang, Yuthok, everybody. I also went. There was a photograph [of us] [in the newspaper]. We went to Delhi. By then the Dalai Lama had already come to India.   

**Q:**  Did you go to Delhi?   

**A:**  Yes, we did and we stayed at the Mariner Hotel. They went to meet Nehru.   

**Q:**  Who? Lukhangwa and all?   

**A:**  Yes, Lukhangwa and all.   

**Q:**  Therefore how was it? The three of them were the main ones, right? Then later the monk officials came. They were Thubden Nyinji [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད], Champa Tsündrü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས], and Champa Wangdü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས].   

**A:**  They must have been there. They must have come in 1951 [NOTE: They actually came in 1956].   

**Q:**  Yes, so it is said that they were there. Then it is said that Drunyichemmo Angula was there and so was Yuthok and Phünkang and Lukhangwa. So how were they organized? Was it one organization and who were the leaders?   

**A:**  Mainly Shakabpa and Gyalola. Then they went to Lukhangwa and maybe they had a meeting.   

**Q:**  Where did Lukhangwa stay?   

**A:**  On the other side of Hilltop. These days it's a school. I don't know the name of the house.   

**Q:**  Where did Drunyichemmo Angula stay?   

**A:**  He was staying somewhere in town. Below the main road.   

**Q:**  And you had not been to Shakabpa House for any meetings?   

**A:**  No. I had not been there.   

**Q:**  What about Tsarong Pola (grandfather) [NOTE: that was the subject's father and the interviewer's grandfather]?   

**A:**  I don't remember him going. But who was it you said had mentioned that he did go?   

**Q:**  There were people who said that. Shakabpa told me in the second week of June 1987 in Manhattan that my grandfather said, "I told the Chinese that I will catch that Shakabpa by the ears and bring him back to Tibet." Shakabpa then told my grandfather not to join the organization, but he wanted to. So he signed and then soon after he returned [to Lhasa]."   

**A:**  I don't recall this at all. If he did go [to a meeting] I would be the one to take him since I drove the car. I really don't remember him going at all. Otherwise I would recall it.   

**Q:**  Some say that there were also representatives of the monasteries -- a representative from Sera and Ganden. It is said that this Ganden representative had a goiter. Do you know any of them?   

**A:**  There must be, but I don't know them.   

**Q:**  It is said that Drepung's Jayan Dawa [Tib. 'jam dbyangs lza ba] was there. and so was Shelkar Chandzö.   

**A:**  I don't know. I had no business [with this] and I didn't stay around.   

**Q:**  You don't know Shelkar Chandzöla?   

**A:**  I knew Shelkar Chandzö. He had crooked eyes. He did come to visit with snacks. but we didn't talk about politics.   

**Q:**  Earlier [years ago] you told me that Shakabpa and Gyalo Thondup came to visit Pola at our house. So what was that about? Were they asking him to join the organization or what?   

**A:**  That was in 1958. They were asking him not to return and to stay and be their leader since he had a lot of experience. He said that it is not easy to be the leader. He asked them what backing they had. Just one to two thousand people and one to two lakhs of rupees is not enough. You need millions of dollars. So show me this. My father was a forceful talker. He said, "You Sirs, show me! Show me who is backing you? If you have that, then I will work. But our people will not be of any use. Our people just can't fight. You need the Künga Thöndrub [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་དོན་གྲུབ] [money (literally that which fulfills everything good)] and if that backing is there then foreigners will come. I can hire mercenaries. Then I can lead. But just saying you have it wont allow you to manage. So all they said was that they had something, but did not talk about it clearly.   

**Q:**  Let me then ask you about the Shangdab [Tib. གཞང་འདབས] hydroelectric station. Since there was already another power station, why was it started?   

**A:**  There was the Dogde [Tib. དོག་བདེ] power station, but that was getting very old and after some time it stopped working.   

**Q:**  How did the Dogde power station begin?   

**A:**  It was started very early. It started around 1927-28 and it provided electricity to Lhasa. [This was done by Changöpa, one of the boys sent to England by the 13th Dalai Lama]. At that time, the system was not good. The reason was that there was a high tension wire going up to Trapchi. Mainly it was used for the machinery at Trapchi, which also included making guns. So there was a high tension voltage line up to that point. From this point on, the voltage was stepped down to 220 volts and the various machines were run. Now another high tension wire went straight to Lhasa where there was a substation. It was known as the Gyambumgang Lokhang. The power was stepped down there and a generator was run. There were two motors there. The AC motor was run to the DC motor which produced 220 volts DC. Then there were banks of batteries which were charged and this provided the electricity for Lhasa. Now the batteries didn't last very long. After a life of 5-7 years, they got weaker and then died. So there weren't new batteries being bought and so that's how it didn't work. So a new hydroelectric station was required. Later Aufschnaiter and Fox were in Lhasa. They were saying that there was no power because there was not sufficient water. So Aufschnaiter was sent to investigate and he stayed at Dogde. He stayed there for two or three months and concluded that the Kyidu River [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག] itself had to be tapped. So Aufschnaiter said that some research was necessary and so he stayed at Jarong [Tib. ལྕགས་རོང]. He rented a house and stayed there for many months. It is said that he even went to investigate at night to see where the water was coming from and what damage the water was doing. Later it was decided that the river itself should be tapped. The summer streams were blocked and culverts were made. With theodolites the main river was measured and canals were made. At that time Fox was there and I was. We wrote to England and GEC [General Electric Company] and told them our requirements and asked them if they could manufacture these and send us a price quotation. I got the quotation. My companion was Tsendrön Thubden Tsenley la. He was from the same shagtsang as Thamjö Chödrag [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་ཆོས་གྲགས]. So this was ordered through Gilbert Gilkes.   

**Q:**  Gilbert what?   

**A:**  Gilbert Gilkes Gordon Limited. The plans were sent and the machinery was ordered from them. This was for the alternating and generating set. So according to the plan, we made the canals here in Tibet. We built storerooms and offices. We asked a GEC man to come and check out the transmission lines. I requested the government a[to agree to that] and Mr. Reed came. He stayed for a month and noted down the details of the Lhasa substation layout, transformer, and the city lighting. The contract was signed and the officials of Trapchi came to where Mr. Reed stayed. I was the interpreter. The officials told him that we have sanctioned all the plans that you have handed to us. He was so happy that he broke down and cried. He said, "Oh, I'm always like this." Mr Fox was sitting next to him and told him. "John, it's okay, it's okay." So the contract was signed and so we were told to go and collect the items. But at that time there was all this problem with the Chinese. There was talk that the Chinese were going to invade. That same winter we were to go and get the items. I was told to go down [to India]. The Chinese were to attack then the Dalai Lama had to go to Yadong and since I was to go to India, Mr. Reed also came with me. So I stayed for a few days at Yadong and went down [to India]. I was told to get the items ordered and the transmission lines, but now all of it now had to be cancelled and we had to pay 20% or something as the cancellation fee. The rest of the items were to be locked up in case they came to be of use later on. We took delivery of the items such as the wires, switches, bolts, and transformers. There were 8 transformers.   

**Q:**  So all these items were sent up to Lhasa?   

**A:**  We sent many items. All the smaller items were sent. Then there were the items from England, from Gilbert Gilkes, that were sent. But large items like the generator and level-pinion were still left behind. They are still there.   

**Q:**  They are still there?   

**A:**  Supposedly.   

**Q:**  Who's looking after it?   

**A:**  Later, by the Tibetan bureau representatives. Then when they built Tibet House, there were two tail-piece pipes for the water. So when they were building Tibet House in Gangtok, they used it to for water. Then at Rabang, at a Tibetan rehabilitation center, one of them was used to store water there. Maybe they are still there. The ball bearings were later sold by them. Later the Dalai Lama's Trust, the Paljor Office, also sold them in Calcutta. It is said that the generators were used for diesel engines and bought by some tea planter. Maybe some of the transformers are lying about.   

**Q:**  You had to start some work at the Shangdab hydroelectric station, right? So what work was done, whether it be digging canals or installing poles, and what items were sent up there and what happened to the items. How much construction was completed?   

**A:**  All the offices were built. [The office] was two stories high. For example, it was the size of Taring's House. The ground floor was all godowns [storage] at the back. In front there were rooms for people to stay. On the top floor were the offices. It was an excellent building all in stone. I have all the pictures, but I don't have pictures of when it was completed. Then the canals were made. They were completed right up to the . Most of the workers were Trapchi Regiment soldiers, but others were also hired. The 200 soldiers were all paid wages. They were sent from Trapchi. And Aufschnaiter was there too.   

**Q:**  So houses were built and canals too?   

**A:**  At the spot where the station was to be erected, a lot of blasting was completed. The smaller items were all send up [from India to Lhasa]. Thousand of boxes were sent. We also sent a lot of cement. We sent around 3-4 thousand bags of cement. About 2-3 thousand boxes were locked up at Shangdab. Later when the Chinese came, they said they wanted it and they were taking it from there. The government heard about this and Drönyerchemmo Phala asked us to come to Norbulinga. He said that it seems that the Chinese are taking the items that are the government's property, but we will also need these at Norbulinga, so it is not right for the Chinese to just take it like that. We don't blame you because you all can't stop this from happening. So we will sent the Gusung (Bodyguard regiment] soldiers with horse carts to bring the things down here and lock them up in storage rooms. So they had the rooms prepared and about 5-6 horse carts came and with the soldiers we took the items to Norbulinga. Later the Chinese came, and it seems the Chinese made use of some electrical wiring at Norbulinga, and they took out the items [for use there]. They themselves may have taken some too. But it was very useful. All the Norbulinga lines were used from there.   

**Q:**  Now if the Chinese came to get the items they couldn't just do it, right?   

**A:**  They may have been talking with the Trapchi Office and they may have sent some person to say the Chinese want it so give it to them. So they had to give it. The main person who was staying there as nyerpa (steward) was one of my persons who was called Bu Ane. Thubden Tsenle la was Thamjö Sonamla. The two of them took turns staying there. They would keep a list of all that was taken.   

**Q:**  If the Chinese came, wouldn't they require a Kashag order?   

**A:**  I don't think they had to ask the Kashag. The Trapchi Office must have given it to them since it was electrically goods.   

**Q:**  Now here you are starting a hydroelectric station and so what were the Chinese saying about it?   

**A:**  They were taking a lot of interest and they came to my quarters. They wanted to know about the documents and the plans. So I showed them the plans [blueprints]. I brought the plans down from Trapchi and showed them at my home. There were 20 odd blueprints and they looked at these. There were about 7-8 Chinese. Then they came to look at it again later. In the end, they took the plans saying that they were going to look at them. Then Zhang Dai biao [Jingwu] called me one day. He was the highest leader in Tibet right? So I went and he said, "You are starting an electric plant and this is good. However, all the items are fake [Tib. མར་པིང] and they are of no use. You have been tricked. They English and American imperialists have fooled you. They have also fooled us! And they gave China all the old things." I said that the items cannot be old because we ordered the items according to our specifications. He said, "No, no, it's not true." So I couldn't argue much since the government was [going along with them]. If I persisted I would be told that I was an English spy. This was already being said about me by spreading false information. . So he said that it was all old stuff, and I was not in a position to forcefully defend myself. So with an insult, the matter was dropped. Then I was not called. Then a few Chinese came after this. Since they had already taken away the plans, then they did not bother to come.   

**Q:**  Now if they took away the plans, did you have another copy from which to work?   

**A:**  No we did not. There was only one set of plans.   

**Q:**  So if they took that, then could you do the work?   

**A:**  We couldn't do the work. But even if we had to work, we couldn't since all our people were gone. Out technicians were Mr. Fox, Neibailoff, Mr. Reed, and Aufschnaiter. Bob Ford was about to be transferred and he was to come and work for us.   

**Q:**  But they were all gone, right?   

**A:**  Yes, all gone. Only the Chinese were there.   

**Q:**  So when you say that the Chinese came and took items, was that in 1956-57?   

**A:**  Yes, 1956-57.   

**Q:**  So after the Chinese came the project was more or less over, right?   

**A:**  From 1955-56 our project was over.   

**A:**  So when the Chinese came in 1950, wasn't the project over by then?   

**A:**  Yes, sort of. We were sending items, but we had no workers [technicians]. Then no one was sanctioning any money from Tibet. Sanctioning money in the old days was very poorly done. A salary of 200-300 dotse was paid. It was a question of a few thousand rupees.   

**Q:**  The parts were being sent in 1955-56 right?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1951, 52, 53 and 54. Then I was told that the Chinese wanted to sent me to China. So the Kashag told me and I said to the Kashag that I have somehow got on the list to go to China and so where should I go. They could not decide so I told them I don't care where I am told to go. If you tell me to go to China, I will go to China. If you want me to go to India to procure the electrical goods, then I will. The Kashag did not have the courage to speak out. The Chinese just took it for granted that I was going. I don't know where they got their sanction, but my name was on the list. There was no talk about going to China. Ultimately the Chinese are more powerful, right? So the list was made and so that's how I went to China. Taring Ashang la [my ashang: Taring George] was working with me and there was another Kungö, a tall person. So those two were sent to India. This Kungö died. The items could only be sent in winter and not summer as the items were large.   

**Q:**  So in 1954 and 1955 the items were being sent?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So even if the items were being sent, Fox, Neibailoff, and Aufschnaiter were not there, right?   

**A:**  No, they were not.   

**Q:**  Even if the items were sent, who was going to do the work? Was there anybody who could look at the plans and do it?   

**A:**  It was sort of said that the Chinese would do it. If not, who else was there. So I left it and didn't bother with it. Later nobody said anything about it.   

**Q:**  So you lost interest in it too. You were not interested?   

**A:**  No. I was not interested. My thoughts were on leaving the country.   

