# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0043.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** July 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsarong Rimshi [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི], whose personal name was Dündül Namgyal [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], was a well-known Western-educated Tibetan official from one of the richest and most important aristocratic families. He was the son of Tsarong Dzasa, the architect of the program of military and infrastructural modernization after the 13th Dalai Lama returned from exile in India in 1913. In this interview, he talks generally about the situation in 1949-50 when Tibetans were afraid of the coming of the Chinese, and the Tibetan government performed rituals for safety. He also discusses the monk soldier volunteers who went to Kham and the first battle in Denkhog where Rupön Bökhangwa was lost. He then talks about the attitudes of the people after Chamdo fell and how most people were packing their things and preparing to leave Tibet. He discusses how he left with Neidbailoff who had come to work on the power station. His father was given 100 Trapchi Soldiers led by a gyagpön as sentries when the Dalai Lama crossed the Ramagang ferry site to flee to Yadong. He remembers many wealthy people taking their things to the monasteries and planning to take them back after the situation calmed. He also discusses the general feelings of the Tibetans who were innocent and ignorant and had no idea what was going to happen. Tibet's community leaders thought that Tibet would be protected by the deities. He describes the Chinese's first arrival and mentions Zhang Jingwu's arrival in Kalimpong. Finally, he discusses the members of the Tibetan Trade Mission in Kalimpong.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0043_05/H_0043_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1949-50 where were you?   

**A:**  During 1949 I was in Lhasa all the time. All of 1949 and also 1950. Only at the end of 1950 did we leave.   

**Q:**  So during this period what were you hearing? In 1949, the Chinese were not saying that they want to liberate [Tibet], right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were such talk. During 1949, China was taken by the communists and right after that they were saying that they were going to liberate Taiwan and Tibet. The Tibetans were alarmed and did a lot of rituals and many things.   

**Q:**  Specific rituals?   

**A:**  Yes, many special rituals. The rituals were continuous. And then in 1950, I think it was about the 6th month, the battle started. I think it was in the area of Denkhog [Tib. ལྡན་ཁོག] that people like Rupön Bökhangwa [Tib. སྦུད་ཁང་བ] were lost. Then the Tibetans retreated and then things were quiet for a while. They were still going on about wanting to liberate Tibet etc, etc. So everybody stayed in a state of alarm. Then soldiers were being sent and Assembly meetings took place. Volunteers came forward from the 3 great monasteries and many left.   

**Q:**  Did they go?   

**A:**  Yes. Between 50-100 must have gone with their swords in their sashes, wearing an amulet [Tib. གའུ] and carrying a rifle swung over their shoulders. Then the soldiers were also going and [Tib. དམག་རྒྱགས] supplies were also being sent.   

**Q:**  I see, supplies were sent.   

**A:**  Whether one should say supplies [I am not sure], but ammunition was being sent. And extra soldiers. Lhalu was down there and there was radio communications since Ford was down there [in Chamdo]. Later Lhalu's time was up and Ngabö went [to Chamdo]. Before Lhalu came up [to Lhasa] there was a lot of commotion.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  There was a lot of danger and fear that the Chinese were going to come up. We had already engaged them and a lot of preparations were being made. Then after Ngabö went down [to Chamdo] they began the main battle that was [an attack] from about five different directions. Then gradually we lost ground and finally Chamdo was lost. That was something like September 17-18th, although you can find that in the history books. At that time I was in Drigung and Drigung Rimpoche came up and I was there for the celebrations for almost a month. The main ceremony was done at a village below the monastery called Dzongshöl [Tib. རྫོང་ཞོལ] where I stayed for about 10 days. Then he had to go to Drigung Thil [Tib. མཐིལ] for the more celebrations. I was at Drigung when I heard that Chamdo was lost.   

**Q:**  At that time was grandfather and everyone there?   

**A:**  No, no. I was there and Jigme [his son] was there, but he was small and would not know anything. Generally, it was customary to stay for at least a month, but they [the Drigung people] would not know anything about the political situation, right? All the chandzö and Dechang were saying, "Oh, you have come today and these ceremonies are a once in a lifetime event so we insist that you stay for an extended period." I said how can I relax, Chamdo is already lost, but they didn't know anything. They didn't think it was important.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  They didn't consider it to be serious. Just some war on the border. I was saying, "Oh my, there is no way for me to stay. We can't stay like this. We must run away. Rimpoche and all should go down [Lhasa]. You just cannot stay like this. I said I can't stay like this, I have to leave immediately". So we quickly went down to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  And they were not concerned.   

**A:**  They were not in the least bit concerned. Then we went down and started packing and so everyone was agitated.   

**Q:**  Yes, so you must have had some conversations with grandfather.   

**A:**  Sure.   

**Q:**  Before you even went to Drigung there must have been news that you must have heard. At Dekyiling there was a radio, right.   

**A:**  A radio was there.   

**Q:** : Where?   

**A:**  At our house.   

**Q:**  I mean wireless. Or was the radio announcing everything.   

**A:**  There was All India Radio and the whole world. And everybody heard the news immediately. So it was said that Chamdo was lost and everybody was starting to pack and all they were thinking of was running away.   

**Q:**  So when Chamdo was lost, everyone was packing and getting ready to leave.   

**A:**  Everyone was and they were afraid. The old mentality was such that people were not thinking of running away completely. For the time being, people were going to move some distance away and the belongings that one could not carry were packed and in the Tibetan custom they would store them in the monasteries. Then when the situation calmed down then they would gradually return. So that's the way people thought. It was the old mentality. It seems people thought in that way. They did not think of leaving for good. Then it was said that the Dalai Lama should not stay like this and so Assembly meetings were held.   

**Q:**  At these Assembly meetings did all the officials have to go?   

**A:**  For the Full Assembly [Tib. ཙོནདུ་གྱེནཛོམ], all the officials had to go. [Since] I didn't have to go, they probably had an Abbreviated Assembly [Tib. ཙོནདུ་ཧྲགདུ] meeting. Then things were getting more urgent and they said that the Dalai Lama should not stay and so the Dalai Lama left. Before the Dalai Lama left, a lot of people left. My mother left, my sister [Shatra] [interruption: dog]   

**Q:**  So you came down from Drigung.   

**A:**  Yes. We came down and everyone had thoughts of fleeing, but the Dalai Lama had not left, so we could not go.   

**Q:**  I see. Unless the Dalai Lama left everyone had to stay.   

**A:**  Of course. No one left. Family members were sent ahead.   

**Q:**  Who went ahead, mother?   

**A:**  No. Mother did not go ahead. Your grandmother and the elder ones went along with the children. And Lady Shatra Jamkusho and her children. I don't recall who else was with them. Later as the situation became more dangerous, your mother left with all you children. And all the other families were leaving because no one dared to stay behind. Then it was said the Dalai Lama was going and it seemed that he was to go up to Yadong. And as his entourage, my late father with 100 soldiers crossed at Ramagang and took the path south of the river as sentries in case enemies came from that side. The Dalai Lama came via the main route. So that's how we went.   

**Q:**  And where did you go?   

**A:**  It was already decided that I was to go and get the hydroelectric goods from India, so I went along, and along with us was Neibailoff. Can you put [the tape] off for a while? Lets see what else I should talk about.   

**Q:**  Then when you left, the people at Drigung were not interested in Rimpoche leaving.   

**A:**  No. There was nothing from their side. Let alone this, even later in 1959 when my late father said that he wants to send Rimpoche out, they prevented him from doing so. They sent people from Drigung and said that they were going to report the matter to the government.   

**Q:**  What about the general public and the monks of the 3 great monasteries.   

**A:**  The people in the three great monasteries are all simple monks and they must have organized a force in the monasteries and stayed thinking that nothing was going to happen. We don't know, but some of the Rimpoches and the better off monks must have left for some place. They could have gone to Tsang or places in the South close by. But the wealthier households like government officials kept their belonging at the monasteries and went to India. Some stayed at the border around Yadong.   

**Q:**  You said that my grandfather took 100 Trapchi soldiers and went via Ramagang while the Dalai Lama took the main route. How did this happen? He was retired and a Dzasa, so how did he get to take 100 soldiers.   

**A:**  Yes, he was retired, but such things happen at the spur of the moment. To political persons such things do happen. For example, the UN sends troops, but civilian people are send as the head. He was not a soldier. So we went that way and crossed at Ramagang.   

**Q:**  You were together too.   

**A:**  Yes. We crossed at Ramagang. There was a place.   

**Q:**  Who were the Trapchi soldier under.   

**A:**  They were from the Trapchi regiment and there was a gyagpön, but I don't recall his name. So there were dingpön and Jupön under him. They had to take the orders from my father. When we looked below, we could see Chushul where the Dalai Lama was camped. We could see them through our binoculars. With the auspicious banner called Tashi Traring [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁྲ་སྒྲིག] and the flags it was a pretty gaudy sight. My father sent a messenger saying that until now, there are no concerns from this side. Then no other report was sent. They went via the Jagsam bridge [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ] and we crossed over the pass from this side and went via Jagsam. We would join up with them at Paldi [Tib. དཔལ་དི]. No. Before we crossed over the Gampala [Tib. གམ་པ་ལ] Pass, my late father went very fast. I told him that if you go fast there is a lot of ice and you could fall, but he wouldn't listen and he just took off in front like anything. I came slowly. One is going to get there anyway. Then ahead [I saw that] he had fallen, as his horse had slipped. He hurt his lower back. We crossed over the pass and that night when we got to Paldi, he was suffering a lot. At that time, all we had was Zambak [a green ointment like Vaseline. A Bengay prototype] for massaging. So that night we rested, but since the Dalai Lama was arriving, we departed urgently at 2 a.m. in the morning. He was in great pain, but still he pushed forward and after Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] there was a village where we rested for the night. So we sort of got left behind as they said that the Dalai Lama had already left. The next morning we left taking the short cut to Khangmar [Tib. ཁང་དམར] while the Dalai Lama was going to Gyantse. From Khangmar we would join up together as from Gyantse one reached Khangmar. The Dalai Lama had not yet arrived at Khangmar when we got there. When we were there, people were saying that he was about to arrive, maybe that very evening. But we left from Khangmar and went to a dak bunglow. Lungshar was there. I forgot his name but his nickname was "twisted mouth," porkyok [Tib. སྤོར་ཀྱོག]. He is the one who is said to have [killed] Reting Rimpoche. He was so tired that he got left behind and so he could not go. Usually they were used to living leisurely. So we left and arrived at Phari and then we went to Yadong. The Dalai Lama was to stay at Yadong, but we said that we had better go some distance down since there could be danger from that side. And so my father established himself at Yadong Rinchengang [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་སྒང] with the soldiers. I stayed for about 4-5 days. My father was there along with the late Taring [George] who was an assistant [Tib. ལེཇ]. Lungshar was the other assistant. So the two along with my father and 100 soldiers were there [at Yadong Rinchengang].   

**Q:**  They were assistants of what? At Rinchengang.   

**A:**  When they left from Lhasa, they were appointed as leja. One needs assistants and nobody goes alone. For example when the UN chief comes, his personal secretary and so many others are needed. So it was like that.   

**Q:**  When you came, what was Neibailoff doing at the Shangdab Hydroelectric station.   

**A:**  He was not able to do anything.   

**Q:**  Was he supposed to do something?   

**A:**  We had agreed to employ him later. In the meantime, he was staying at Trapchi. He used to repair the diesel engine at Trapchi and run it when we were printing [currency]. There was a diesel engine, which I presented to Trapchi. When there were concerns with larger technical electrical matters he did not take part in them.   

**Q:**  So he also came together, right?   

**A:**  Yes, quite a knack. He must have known we were leaving. Everybody in Lhasa knew that the Dalai Lama was about to leave and he must have heard that we were also leaving. So he asked us to take him along. He seems to have been experienced. He bought a whole carcass of mutton, which he slung over his horse and he came to our house. . We said we were not about to leave and that he should return. Then the next day he came with his carcass . So later we took him along. He was given a rifle and he came along.   

**Q:**  How long did [you] stay at Yadong?   

**A:**  Who? Me?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I must have stayed there for 4-5 days, then I had electrical work. The order had to be cancelled.   

**Q:**  How long did grandfather and the others stay?   

**A:**  They stayed for a long time.   

**Q:**  Later there was a lot of talk at Yadong about [the Dalai Lama] staying and returning.   

**A:**  At that time my father was there. He was at the meetings.   

**Q:**  He was at the meetings?   

**A:**  Yes, he was there, but I don't know what he said. I have not heard that he said anything forcefully.   

**Q:**  You never had any talks with him about it later?   

**A:**  No. At that time I don't think he said anything forcefully. I guess he sort of couldn't estimate the situation, and the ones who said that the Dalai Lama should return were too powerful. There were not many who said that he should go to India.   

**Q:**  But during this time you must be knowing his thoughts.   

**A:**  At that time, I did not have any talks with him. In the first place, everyone was in a state of shock and came up to Yadong. We did not have any talks and plans about the future. My thoughts were on nothing but leaving. Whatever we could take we packed completely and brought with us.   

**Q:**  Packed and were sent down?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then where did you go? At Yadong there must have been meetings and discussions about returning or leaving. And finally the Dalai Lama returned. So regarding this, since you were not there, you probably don't have any details.   

**A:**  No. I don't have details, and even in their letters, people did not dare mention things clearly.   

**Q:**  Then you came to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes and your mother and all were at Kalimpong - staying at Vinod Villa.   

**Q:**  Grandmother was there too?   

**A:**  Yes, everyone. My sister Shatra and her children.   

**Q:**  Taring Ani Bettyla too?   

**A:**  And your mother too.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  I must have stayed for about 10-15 days writing letters and then I went down to Calcutta.   

**Q:**  So you were doing the work there and you had nobody to assist you?   

**A:**  At first, I had no help.   

**Q:**  So you must have gone to Calcutta and then returned to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes. I stayed for a while and then came to Kalimpong and then once again went to Calcutta.   

**Q:**  So in this manner you must have stayed for about a year in India.   

**A:**  Oh, it was more than that. I stayed in 1950, all of 1951, and returned to Lhasa in March-April of 1952.   

**Q:**  So you came down in 1950 and returned in 1952, right? So during this time what political changes had taken place. On the one hand, the 17-Point Agreement had been signed. Was there any organization here at Kalimpong with Tharchin Babula and others? The Dalai Lama was at Yadong, so we Tibetans had to start an organization - wasn't there anything like that said?   

**A:**  There must have been. But nobody said anything to me.   

**Q:**  Why? Since you were a government official, would they not inform you?   

**A:**  I didn't stay around much. They probably did not know where I was. I would go to Calcutta and then come up and so on. Later when I was doing the hydroelectric work, I stayed in Gangtok for a long time.   

**Q:**  Finally, how was it decided to return.   

**A:**  Who? Me or the government.   

**Q:**  You. Didn't mother and all return in 1952.   

**A:**  Yes, my late mother and all returned because my father sent a letter saying that now everyone had decided to return. And so what should we do hanging around.   

**Q:**  I see, a letter arrived.   

**A:**  Yes. There was a letter to that effect and moreover the people who had come down were all returning gradually. However, the Trade Mission personnel had work to do, so they stayed behind. Other than that, everyone was leaving. But my work was not completed. The items ordered were arriving and they had to be shipped to Lhasa. I took time renting storage areas in Calcutta. So I returned and made my report and said that I can't do this work by myself and that I need an assistant. And so Taring George, Kungö Tangme, and Sumdo Georgela were sent to help me. Then in the winter of 1952 we all came down (to Kalimpong).   

**Q:**  You went up in 1952 and came down the same year.   

**A:**  Yes. I stayed at Lhasa for about 5 months. When we got there, there was talk that the People's Association had met and the Chinese soldiers are around and the members of the People's Association were arrested, things like that. That the Chinese were suspicious and were going about with their guns.   

**Q:**  Some say that during this time there was a curfew in the towns and the shops were closed. Did this happen?   

**A:**  Yes it did. The shops would close out of fear, right?   

**Q:**  Curfew too?   

**A:**  I don't think they said specially to close the shops. There was no custom of curfews. They would close the shops by themselves. When the Chinese soldiers march up and down people would think that something is going to happen and would quickly close their shops. There would be no customers anyway. So things like that must have happened. I did not go in those areas.   

**Q:**  You were not in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa and there was such talk.   

**Q:**  So even though you were at Lhasa, you did not take notice of these things going on. Some say the [representatives of the] People's Association went to Zhang Jingwu's residence.   

**A:**  One wouldn't go to those areas. Who is going to go where there is danger. For example, if there is fighting in town among the Gorkhas and the police, one wouldn't go near there right? One would remain indoors. So this is what was said and I had no thoughts of staying at all. Only about leaving. And since I had work [in India], how should I say, I took the opportunity- anyway I came down to India.   

**Q:**  If you had such thoughts did you not have talks with others like your father saying now I don't think you should stay but should leave, etc, etc?   

**A:**  How is that possible? The Dalai Lama was there and everyone was there. All the important officials were there and there was not one who was leaving. So there was no way to leave. The situation was most strange.   

**Q:**  In what manner, strange?   

**A:**  All the people who worked were there including the Shape and all the other officials. People like me who had work left, but how could the others leave unless they quietly ran away. They might even get arrested. And we were from a big family and just couldn't run away like that. One had belongings to take. People would immediately know that one was running away.   

**Q:**  Did some Tibetans think in the following manner? I asked Taktse Rimpoche and he said they told him that the Chinese are not going to do anything. That the three great monasteries are still there and the two Jowo [Buddha statues] are still there and so what can happen; nothing is going to happen.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes. Many thought this way. I think 99% of the people thought in this way. The people had no education and never thought about the consequences and had no political thinking. It was as if it was a fight among themselves, and they would say, "Chinese corpse" [Tib. གྱ་རོ]. They had no idea of fearing and running away. When the Chinese first came they said that they were not going to take even a thread and a needle and even when the Tibetans pushed them with their shoulders they didn't retaliate and so they said, "Oh, they don't do anything" [to cause harm] and they got used to them. It was like the proverb, "If one really gets used to something [familiar], then the little girl does not even fear the tiger." [Tib. འདྲིས་པའི་བུ་མོ་སྟག་ལ་མི་ཞེད]. But, if you start messing around too much, then one day the tiger will catch you by the neck, right? . And so the tiger did catch us by the neck. So that's what happened.   

**Q:**  Before the interruption, I was mentioning to you what Taktse Rimpoche said [see above].   

**A:**  Yes, it's very true.   

**Q:**  Yes, but why were they saying that nothing was going to happen.   

**A:**  Oh, these people can't think well. They just stayed with a wandering mind [Tib. ཡེངས་པ]. All they were concerned about was a full stomach. They never had much thoughts about politics.   

**Q:**  What do you mean wandering?   

**A:**  It's like being just lazy. Ignorant.   

**Q:**  Innocent?   

**A:**  Would you call it innocent or ignorant> They didn't know. When something happens right in front of one's eyes then they will act alarmed. But it seems they don't think much about what will transpire in the future. The majority can't think anyway.   

**Q:**  I don't think it just that they can't think.   

**A:**  And among the more prominent people too. They were very strongly religious. They said, "Oh the protector deities will protect us and nothing will happen. There will be no problem and it will die away naturally. Things like this happened before and maybe it won't be so bad." So we are people who pass the time in this way.   

**Q:**  Even among the officials that was the thinking right?   

**A:**  The majority thought in this way.   

**Q:**  So since they were very religious, then they thought that if you do the rituals then that alone is sufficient.   

**A:**  Yes. That that alone will protect you. Most thought in this way. However, if one says things like this, then they will say, "Oh, he is someone without religion and he doesn't know religion. He talks all rubbish." And they will attack him in this manner. However one is not attacking religion. We all need religion and something to believe in. However, without preparing for the future and [just] saying that the protector deities will protect you. That alone, without doing any work, then they will not protect you. However, if you work for it, then they will fulfill your request. But they didn't think in this way. If you just open your mouth, they will say, "Oh, he has no religion. In this way we lost our Tibet."   

**Q:**  So when the Chinese came, the majority were saying, Oh, they are not going to be able to come and things might turn out alright.   

**A:**  At first they were afraid. Later, the Chinese policy was very shrewdly evil [Tib. ངན་པོ]. They said that they will not take a needle and a thread, and even if you pushed them they will take it [without retaliating]. So they were being very meek and the people said, "Oh, they are pretty good." So our people were innocent and ignorant and they teased them by provoking them and bumping them with their shoulder and doing a lot of things like that. We are people who could not think. They teased them and pushed them around and the Chinese took it. And so they [Tibetans] started saying, "Oh, they are nothing." And in this way we neglected them and we got used to them. Most people were not thinking about the future but were saying, "It just may be alright. It just may be alright. So that's how things fell to pieces.   

**Q:**  You returned in 1952 right?   

**A:**  Yes, I returned and made a report saying I can't do the work alone. I have thousands of boxes to send.   

**Q:**  Yes, what I wanted to say was that you came to India in 1950 right? Between this period [50-52] the 17-Point Agreement was signed and via sea Zhang Jingwu, Depön and Lhautara, didn't they also come to this side?   

**A:**  That was in 1951.   

**Q:**  Yes, before they went to Lhasa, didn't they come around here [Kalimpong side]. Where were you at that time? In Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, I was in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  So tell me about this. What happened when they came.   

**A:**  It was said that they were coming and it seems that from Lhasa there was a request to the Tibetan Representative, the thonjö. The thonjö was looking for a place for them to stay and many people went to greet them. All the people were told about it and they went to receive them. At that time, the elder Taring Ashang la was there [Jigme Taring]. We went together in my car.   

**Q:**  You had a jeep?   

**A:**  Yes, a Station Wagon. Pandatsang, from the Trade Mission, was there and many Tibetans were also there. So at Teesta [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བྲག] scarves were given. Pandatsang had bought a jeep when he went as a member of the Trade Mission. He had a red Jeep station wagon, though it did not have 4-wheel drive. So they were met in this.   

**Q:**  Why was the color red, was it specially painted here?   

**A:**  No, it was red when it arrived from the States. Tibetans liked the colors red and yellow. So he had a red jeep station wagon in which they [Zhang Jingwu] was brought. Then some said that they wanted to put a Tibetan flag on the car and there was some confusion about this.   

**Q:**  I asked you about the red color because I remember once you had a truck or something and you were not permitted to have the color red and so you had to paint it again.   

**A:**  This was later in 1956-57. Our truck was red. We were using it to transport people. When the truck was going the Chinese stopped it and said that one is not allowed to use the red color for private use, since red was for the military and emergency government use. So they were turned back with all the passengers and they were wondering what to do. So I said we can change it immediately. The truck had a red hood. So I immediately took my Land Rover out and attached the pump to the car engine. Usually I painted my Land Rover green. So I had some green color paint and I immediately painted the truck green. Within one hour it was done.   

**Q:**  Right on the road.   

**A:**  No at home [in Lhasa].   

**Q:**  Now getting back to Kalimpong in 1951, you were saying something about Pandatsang's Jeep.   

**A:**  Yes. They were saying that the Tibetan flag will not do and they were pulling back and forth. Something like that happened. I took photos of this. Then they were all brought to Kalimpong and they [Zhang Jingwu] stayed at Green Woodley, where Mrs. Gangee is staying now. Nobody was staying in that house. We used to say that the house was haunted. So it seems that it was easy to rent. They stayed there and there was some meeting at the Chinese school. Representative Zhang [Jingwu] gave a speech and our Tibetan side gave a short welcome speech. The other person who spoke was Tharchin la. I think he was speaking on behalf of the Tibetan people. He said, "We are happy that you have come and we have this reception for you. However, the situation is such that nothing is certain. For example, 2-3 years ago, last year, on the wall here a photo of Chiang Kaishek was hanging there. Today there is a photo of Mao Zedong. So 2-3 years from now we will never know whose photo might be on the wall. So it's like that, nothing is certain". So he said something like that. And there were a lot of people and there were those who liked and disliked the Chinese. Some were neutral, but they had to go [to the reception].   

**Q:**  At that time who was in the Trade Mission.   

**A:**  I think it was Pandatsang. He was not alone. He had a colleague. Some Khenjung Tsewang or something.   

**Q:**  At that time the Chinese had not taken it over, right?   

**A:**  No. The Chinese were just going up to Tibet.   

**Q:**  So it was Pandatsang?   

**A:**  And after the Chinese came he stayed. Yes?   

**Q:**  He stayed for a long time.   

**A:**  About 2-3 years. Maybe 1951-54.   

**Q:**  After that was it Surkhang?   

**A:**  Surkhang was before that. Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] was also there. Now Trendong can tell you. The first one was Khenjung Tsewang something. It started from 1947.   

**Q:**  Was Pandatsang close to the Chinese from that time or was that later. What happened?   

**A:**  I think he had some contacts with the Chinese earlier because he speaks Chinese. He must have gone to China. And what should I say, whether he did or did not have any political connection [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Was Pandatsang from Kham? Which region?   

**A:**  Yes, from Kham. I don't know which region.   

**Q:**  Was he from Litang?   

**A:**  Maybe. George Patterson book has everything. He stayed there. So it was like that.   

