# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0043.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducte6d and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Tsarong Rimshi, Dündül Namgyal [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི, བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsarong Rimshi [Tib. ཚ་རོང་རིམ་བཞི], whose personal name was Dündül Namgyal [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], was a well-known Western-educated Tibetan official from one of the richest and most important aristocratic families. He was the son of Tsarong Dzasa, the architect of the program of military and infrastructural modernization after the 13th Dalai Lama returned from exile in India in 1913. In this interview, he talks about the Tibetan government controlling Chamdo and Tashilhunpo in the past, how they were later included in the Tibet Autonomous Region and the initial arrival of Zhang Jingwu in Kalimpong. He talks about three Chushigandru members coming to Kalimpong to ask for donations, how his father was told to stay in India and lead the 1958 movement of the Tibetan independence and the withdraw of students from Darjeeling and the return to Tibet of the government officials who were India. He talks about the arrival of the American Correspondent A.T. Steele in Lhasa, how the soldiers of the Bodyguard Regiment changed their uniform, and how the military officers of the other regiments also changed their uniforms. He talks about the Tibetan education system and how the Chinese set up schools with a different system. Finally, he describes the rules in the old society where soccer and bicycles were not allowed, how Shölkang Jedrung was scolded by the Yigtsang for playing soccer and was punished by the Drönyerchemmo for taking photos when the Dalai Lama went to Drepung.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0043_01/H_0043_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Father, I am going to ask you about the things that happened in 1950. After the 17-Point Agreement was signed in 1951, Lhasa, Shigatse and Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ] became kind of three separate administrations, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time they kind of put Chamdo as autonomous [from Lhasa].   

**Q:**  Before the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, they made these three different areas separate, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After Chamdo surrendered to the Chinese and the Chinese got the full power, they set up an administration.   

**Q:**  What was the traditional system in the Tibetan government regarding Shigatse and Chamdo before it was separated?   

**A:**  In the past, Chamdo fully belonged to the Tibetan government and the government used to send one kalön as the Governor-General of Kham. He was called the Dome Jigyab. The Tibetan government had full control over Kham. As for Shigatse, except for the monastic estates granted to the Panchen Lama, the Tibetan government collected all of the taxes from the local places and they set up the Shigatse Jidzong [Tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] (Governor-General of Shigatse/Tsang).   

**Q:**  The Panchen Lama had more estates than the other monasteries, but they were also under the Tibetan government's control, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They had to send soldiers [to the Tibetan army] from Lhatse [Tib. ལྷ་རྩེ], Ngamring [Tib. ངམ་རིང] and Phüntsoling [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང] dzong. Probably, those belonged to the monastic estates of Tashilhunpo.   

**Q:**  Later on, it became kind of separated, right?   

**A:**  Well, not totally separated. Meetings were held in Lhasa and they had their delegates who were quite powerful. At the time of the reforms, they kind of supported the reforms. But at that time, they didn't formally set up [a separate entity] like Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Some of the books say that there was a separate administration even if it was not autonomous. Were you not aware of this?   

**A:**  At that time they didn't set up a separate autonomous entity. They belonged to the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**Q:**  Later on, didn't the Chinese try to raise the status of the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  Yes. When the Panchen Lama returned [from China], the Chinese said that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama are equal and we should place equal thrones for both of them. Regarding this, there was a lot of talk. Actually, there was not any system like this, but finally they decided that they would sit on chairs when they met. Actually, the Dalai Lama was older so the Panchen Lama should have prostrated to the Dalai Lama and offered him a khata scarf. In early times when the Dalai Lama was young, the Panchen Lama Chökyi Nyima [Tib. ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ] came to be his tutor [Tib. ཡོངས་འཛིན] so the Dalai Lama prostrated to the Panchen Lama. This was because he was the tutor.   

**Q:**  I heard that when the Panchen Lama came [from Amdo], they set up equal chairs for them [the Panchen and Dalai Lamas]. Apart from that, were there any other events where the Chinese raised the status of the Panchen Lama at ceremonies and other occasions?   

**A:**  There weren't any other ceremonies at that time. After that, he [the Panchen Lama] left for Shigatse. This was his first time going to Shigatse. At that time, the Tibetan government arranged an elaborated seeing off arrangement and all of the government officials went to see him off, except the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Zhang Jingwu came through India, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did he come?   

**A:**  Probably, the representative of the Tibetan government received a message. At that time, I was here [in Kalimpong] and Taring Kungö [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] was also here. We were told that we should go to receive him in Teesta. At that time, the government officials in the Tibetan Bureau [Tib. དོན་གཅོད] or the Trade Mission went to receive him, so it wouldn't be alright if I didn't go. So I also went there taking a khata scarf. At that time Pandatsang was the main person who apparently made a friendly relationship with Zhang Jingwu and they also sent their own car. At that time, Zhang Jingwu was chauffeured in his two wheel red car that Pandatsang bought when he went to America in 1946 on the Trade Mission; they put a Chinese flag on it. However, at that time, there was some trouble with some people saying that we should put the Tibetan flag on it. Finally, the Chinese were powerful and put the Chinese red flag on his car. There were 7-8 cars altogether.   

**Q:**  When you went to Teesta, were there Chinese representatives in that place?   

**A:**  There weren't any Chinese representatives, but there were a lot of pro-Chinese Chinese men staying in Kalimpong and there was also a Chinese school there [in Kalimpong]. These Chinese were kind of cunning and they would just side with wherever the wind was blowing. The Chinese man called Tsering Pola [Tib. ཚེ་རིང] and another Chinese called Zhang and many other Chinese came to receive him. Probably, there was a Chinese Association [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག]. They [the Chinese in Kalimpong] held a reception in the Chinese school and he was invited there. The Tibetans arranged for Zhang Jingwu to stay in Green Wood Lade where Ms. Gandhi used to stay. On the next day or the day after when he was taking rest, he was invited to a reception in the school and Zhang Jingwu gave a lecture. Probably the Tibetans also welcomed him. Another Chinese, probably a school teacher, also gave a lecture. From among the Tibetans, Tharchin [Tib. མཐར་ཕྱིན] Babu gave a special kind of lecture and talked a lot. He had a great sense of humor and he said, "Look at this! The photo of Mao Zedong is in the middle and on the right side is Zhude and the left side is Zhou Enlai. In the past, there used to be the photo of Chiang Kaishek, the leader of the Guomindang. After several years, we don't know who will come to be in the middle." He said that in a kind of kidding manner. Then in a shoddy manner [Tib. ར་བེ་རོ་བེ], Zhang Jingwu went to Yadong. At that time, there were about 9 people with him. All of them wore new gray colored Sun Yat-sen style suits [Ch. zhong shan fu] and caps.   

**Q:**  Who gave the lecture from among the Tibetans?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. Probably, it was Shakabpa or the representatives had to talk. The Director of the Trade Mission or the representative was the Kungö who was living in Ganden Vila [Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen].   

**Q:**  Were the officials of the Trade Mission kind of close to Tharchin Babu?   

**A:**  Tharchin Babu was a Tibetan.   

**Q:**  In the past, it was said that there was a group in Kalimpong, right?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about these things in detail. Kungö Gyalola [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་ལགས] Shakabpa, Phünkang Sey [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་སྲས] and at that time Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] was also there. Because of Yuthok, Phünkang Lhajam Kukula [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ་ཀུ་ཀུ་ལགས], the wife of the late Yuthok Rinzinla [Tib. རིག་འཛིན], was also involved. There were also some people who were not government officials like Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད], and probably Abo Thösam [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་ཐོས་བསམ] was also there. And there was Shelkar Chandzö [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར] with his crooked eyes. Altogether, probably, there were 15-20 people.   

**Q:**  Probably there were some traders representing the [common] people like Shelkar Chandzö, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Shelkar Chandzö was a chandzö (manager) and was eloquent and also his handwriting was good. He looked like a capable person. He might have been the chandzö of Shelkar [Monastery], so he might have been useful for writing things and delivering messages. Abo Thösam had relations with the Khambas. In addition to that, there might be some people from Chushigandru also. At that time, Sandu Abo Nyendra [Tib. ས་འདུ་སྙན་གྲགས] was also here. I am not sure, but probably, Jagö Namgyal Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ] was also here. [Note: these people were there later not in 1951 when Zhang came from China.]   

**Q:**  When did Shakabpa come here?   

**A:**  Probably, he came in 1950.   

**Q:**  When did they set up the group in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Probably, it was set up in 1950 when Shakabpa came here.   

**Q:**  If it was set up in 1950, was Gyalola there at that time?   

**A:**  I am not sure. I remember hearing that once he came here and went back and came here again.   

**Q:**  Did you ever hear that the mimang (people) submitted a petition to the Dalai Lama directly in 1953? According to ancient system, the Dalai Lama was staying in a [limited] inner circle. But I think because of the influence of the Chinese, he had good relations and made contact with the people more closely.   

**A:**  I don't remember anything about this. At that time, in the year 1953, I was coming down [to India] for 6-7 months and going up [to Lhasa] and staying 4-5 months. I think this is not very important because from the early times, although they won't let people enter the Dalai Lama's room, when the Dalai Lama was going up and down from the Potala and to Norbulinga, we would hear that people prostrated to him and made appeals to him on the way [Tib. ཕྱག་འཚལ་རྒྱག]. Though it was kind of not allowed, they were doing that.   

**Q:**  Probably, in 1950, you attended some parties given where Kungö Shakabpa was staying, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you see the groups were there? Did you ever talk about that?   

**A:**  Normally, they would not talk about those things. At that time, the mother of the Dalai Lama also stayed in Hill Top and all of the members of the Yabshi family had come here. There was a lot of talk about the Dalai Lama coming here. At that time, they were also looking for a house [for the Dalai Lama]. But later, as it has been written in books, the people who said that he should return to Tibet became more powerful. At that time, people were holding on to a kind of ancient thinking and said that it would be a disaster if the Dalai Lama would go out of Tibet. They didn't know what was going to happen in the future. For example, when my late father said that he is sending down [to India] our [son who was the] Drigung Kyamgön Rimpoche [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་སྐྱབས་མགོན], the people came from Drigung and said, "We are the representatives of the monks and laymen [Tib. ལྷ་སྡེ་མི་སྡེ], so please don't send him out [of Tibet] because he is the only best person. If you still do that, we are going to report it to the government." They had the same way of thinking. They also didn't know what was going to happen in the future and didn't know how the Communists would be. At that time, they were trying to pull back the Dalai Lama to Tibet. On this matter, the religious side and the people's side became more powerful. Most of the government officials also didn't know the legal system of foreign countries. They were holding a kind of ignorant loyalty [Tib. རྨོངས་ཞེན] [speaking English] about the life of the Dalai Lama without thoughts of the consequences. In this way, they applied pressure and took the Dalai Lama back.   

**Q:**  When you were in Kalimpong, did they come to ask for donations saying that they were from the association [Tib. ཚོགས་པ]?   

**A:**  Yes, they did, but that was later on. In the beginning, there wasn't anything like that.   

**Q:**  When do you mean by later on?   

**A:**  It was in November or December 1958. At that time, Sandu Nyendra, Jagö Namgyal Dorje, and Jamatsang came to me and said that they want a large donation. They said, "The Chinese were making the people suffer, so we are opposing the Chinese." I said, "I don't have anything to donate because I just arrived here [in Kalimpong]. I have only an empty house. I just have a little amount of money for my expenses, but I will donate 5,000 Rs and I have some Tibetan currency, probably about 200-300 dotse. I will donate that also." They said, "This is not at all enough." I said that I don't have more than this to donate. Therefore they got very angry and said, "This is useless, so we are not going to accept this." I said, "If you don't accept this, I don't have more than this to donate." Then they told me, "You should write down that you donated this amount but we didn't accept it." I said, "Yes" and wrote, "I just arrived here so I don't have more than this amount to donate, so they didn't accept it." Then they went back in a very agitated manner. At that time, Jamatsang and Nyendrala didn't show much attitude [of anger], but Jagö Namgyal Dorje even shook his buttock [to show his anger when they left].   

**Q:**  Did they say that the donation was for Chushigandru?   

**A:**  Yes, all of them were Khambas.   

**Q:**  Were there any other talk when my grandfather was there?   

**A:**  When your grandfather [Tsarong Dzasa] was here, Kungö Gyalola came several times. Once my father also visited him in Darjeeling. At that time, Shakabpa and those people came here and told my father, "Do not go back to Tibet. We don't have a better leader here, so please lead us because you have had good experience from the early times opposing [the Chinese]." He [Tsarong Dzasa] told them, "I should lead you to oppose them, but what shall I do?" They said, "It is to strive for Tibetan independence." My father [Tsarong Dzasa] told them, "From early times we have searched for methods to enable Tibet to become independent. At the time of the British, the so-called suzerainty [for Tibet] was made. We used whatever kind of method we could; we could not get rid of the suzerainty. We had already used all kind of methods, but nobody took notice of us and it is impossible also. The only way was to carry a gun and make war and win the victory. If we have to do this, we didn't have the manpower and money. So what kind of idea do you have to depend on? They said, "We have foreign support." Then he said, "You are saying that you have support from foreign countries. What support do you have? Just show me the support you have. If the support is like 1-2 lakhs or 10-20 lakhs of rupees, this would be useless. You need millions of dollars. Show me this and then I will lead you. We don't have soldiers and weapons, but if you show me a reliable and strong [Tib. སྲ་ཐག་ཐག] supporter, we can hire soldiers called mercenaries from Europe, England and from every where." They just said, "Yes, we have." Then he said, "This is not enough, we can't do anything with this. If you don't have the support, I am not going to stay here and lead you. I am going back to Tibet to serve the Dalai Lama, because the Dalai Lama is there." This is one of the important parts. Otherwise, they didn't say anything to us before as I was just a junior officer.   

**Q:**  Later on, they [the Chinese] set up a Chinese representative in Kalimpong, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. They set up the Trade Agent in Kalimpong. At that time, the Indian Trade Agent was also there. The Chinese said that they are also going to set up a Trade Agent here and in Calcutta and they set up the Bank of China in Calcutta. They already had the embassy in Delhi. At that time, there was also the Tibetan Trade Mission and Pandatsang. It was kind of all mixed and seemed like [the Chinese and Tibetan] were doing it jointly and also seemed they were not doing jointly. It remained like this for 1-2 years.   

**Q:**  What was the policy of the Tibetan Representatives in Kalimpong at that time?   

**A:**  They had set up groups for opposing [the Chinese] and they had also taken signatures from the people saying that we have solidarity. The people couldn't say that we are not going to sign it so they signed it. Probably most of the people signed their names.   

**Q:**  At that time, the people who were in Kalimpong were kind of settling down here. Did those groups oppose them and make them unable to stay here? Some people had sent their children to school in Darjeeling. Did they make them unable to stay there?   

**A:**  They didn't purposely make them unable to stay by saying that you are not allowed to send children to the school. But the people withdrew their children because they were afraid. At that time the Tibetan government also had sent students to Darjeeling. The government was kind of afraid of the Chinese, so to please the Chinese they withdrew the students. At that time there were about 10 [government] students.   

**Q:**  Who were they?   

**A:**  I just remember 1-2 of them. One was Kyidu Thöndrub [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྦུག་དོན་གྲུབ]. If you ask him, you will know the others. At that time, Sikkim didn't let Kyidu Thöndrub go back and helped him to conclude his studies.   

**Q:**  What did the other people do at that time?   

**A:**  They were kind of laying down roots in two places. Some of the singles just gave up their own things [and stayed in India]. And the people who had houses and property over there [in Tibet] could not do recklessly things because they had to think about their people [in Tibet]. Some people were thinking that if something happened, they should run away. At that time, there was also a kind of rumor saying, "The Indians will not let the Tibetans stay here and they will hand us over." It was just a talk in the town. At that time, the Tibetan government's Kashag sent an edict. Probably, the Chinese had put pressure on them. They sent edicts to Shakabpa and Yuthok. They didn't send the edict to my late father because he hadn't finished his one year vacation leave. If he hadn't gone back after one year, they might have also sent him an edict. They Kashag sent me an edict because I had just came down, although I was only allowed to go to the border. The edict said, "You should return back to Tibet as soon as possible." Probably, my late father also received an edict saying that he should return when his vacation was over. At that time, people talked to each other and said what we shall do. People like us didn't go back. My father told me, "It is better not to return to Tibet." At that time, I insisted on going back, but he told me to stay here and said, "I am going back because there is nobody serving him [Dalai Lama]. But, you should stay here." He took his son Phüngyala [Tib. ཕུན་རྒྱལ་ལགས] back.   

**Q:**  In 1950 [MCG: 1957-59], Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] was also here, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the main person from whom they sought the advice and held meetings with him. At that time, Lukhangwa was acting as kind of the leader.   

**Q:**  Do you mean in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes. He didn't know anything about the foreign laws and international affairs. He was just ignorant and stupid, but insistent [Tib. ལྐུགས་པ་དབུ་བཙུགས]. He would say, "We should destroy the Chinese. Tibet is independent. We should fight and expel them." He didn't know how to expel them and how to talk with them and what methods we should use and what is the legal status and situation of Tibet. Probably, he knew something, but he didn't know well the international situation then and how all the countries are looking and considering Tibet.   

**Q:**  Later, Lukhangwa was granted his resignation, right?   

**A:**  He didn't formally ask for the resignation [in 1952]. But because of the pressure [from the Chinese], he was told that it is not going to be alright if he didn't resign.   

**Q:**  You mean both of the silön [Tib. སྲིད་བློན], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the other Prime Minister?   

**A:**  He was called Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས].   

**Q:**  He was a monk official, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Before that he, was a fourth rank Khenjung.   

**Q:**  What were they saying was the reason for demoting the two of them?   

**A:**  When they held meetings with the Chinese, Lukhangwa said, "It is not going to be alright if you Chinese don't go back because Tibet is independent. You are not allowed to stay here and he banged his fist on the table saying Tibet is independent." So the Chinese regarded him as the number one [enemy] because he had come out openly. Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] also might have said, "It is indeed as you said." [Tib. ད་ག་རང]. Probably, he didn't bang his fist on the table. Anyway he couldn't take the Chinese side." Therefore, he was dragged along and people said the two Prime Ministers [said something against the Chinese]. At that time, the Chinese put pressure on the Kashag many times and said that the two silön should be expelled from office because they are useless and reactionary. The Kashag acted kind of tactfully and tried to get along well and talk with the Chinese, but they didn't listen to them at all. Probably, they rushed to the Dalai Lama, because at that time they were going to the Dalai Lama directly. Probably, they told a lot to the Dalai Lama. Finally, the Chinese said, "If you are not doing this [demoting the silön], we will arrest them." I heard they also deploy soldiers. When the Chinese were doing things in a very tense manner, the Kashag kind of compromised and told the Chinese, "Please don't do that, we will tell them [silön]. So they went to the silön and told them, "It is not going to be okay if you don't resign and we also asked for instructions from the Dalai Lama. So please resign temporarily." Then the silön asked for the resignation and it was granted right away, but reluctantly. After that, Lukhangwa didn't stay much and went to India. Probably, he was not here in 1950. I think he came in 1951 [Note MCG: he came in 1957].   

**Q:**  At that time, were people saying that Lukhangwa was leading the People's Association?   

**A:**  I am sure he was doing that and those people like Chandzö Lotrin [Tib. བློ་འཕྲིན] were visiting him. But I don't have anything to tell you about this.   

**Q:**  Who's chandzö was Lotrin?   

**A:**  Probably he was a chandzö for Sera Mey College. He was one of the better-off monks. He was a chandzö or a dechang.   

**Q:**  Did he work for the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. His handwriting was good. My late father sent him to school with me. Later, he didn't serve my father and became a monk. He was smart and eloquent.   

**Q:**  Who else were there in that group?   

**A:**  There was another monk who was older than him. He was known to be the brother of Jamön Depa [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན་སྡེ་པ]. Mel La also has written in his book that he came to Sir Charles Bell. He was very famous. He was also very tricky and eloquent and his handwriting was good.   

**Q:**  What was he doing at that time?   

**A:**  He just lived with Tsendrön Thubden Tsenleg [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཚན་ལེགས] who was one of the staff members involved in building the Electric Power unit. I was the Rimshi there, so we worked together. When we were working there, we couldn't stay there permanently [all the time] so he left the chandzö and I left a person called Bu Anan as my acting person. His handwriting was also quite good.   

**Q:**  Who else was there?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about any other people. But Bu Gyagpala [Tib. བུ་རྒྱགས་པ་ལགས] can tell you about this.   

**Q:**  Last time, you told me that there was also a son of our maidservant, right?   

**A:**  That was Lotrin. He was the son of the Sonam Drolma [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་སྒྲོལ་མ], the maidservant of your grandmother. When she heard that Lotrin was arrested, she died from heart failure.   

**Q:**  Before the Chinese arrived, the kalön in the Kashag worked together and didn't have separate work assignments. But, after the Chinese arrived, didn't they work separately?   

**A:**  They did not work separately.   

**Q:**  Were there any kind of reforms made in the Kashag?   

**A:**  No. The Kashag was held the same way as before.   

**Q:**  There wasn't one kalön handling the Home Ministry [Tib. ནང་སྲིད] and another kalön in charge of the military [Tib. དྲག་པོའི] etc. until 1959, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But from among the kalön, Grandfather Ragashag was the Commander-in-Chief and had to attend meetings in the Chinese Army. Otherwise, there weren't any different kinds of kalön as you said.   

**Q:**  What kind of reforms were implemented by the [Tibetan] government?   

**A:**  It was kind of strange at that time. It seemed that the previous government was also there and the Chinese were implementing the reforms from outside. The situation was becoming more and more tight and people were very much scared about that. It also appeared that the Kashag didn't get split up and remained as before.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival, there weren't any reforms to the government, right?   

**A:**  They weren't much in he way of reforms done to the system of government.   

**Q:**  Didn't the government [take over] managing the dzongs [their income]? When did that happen?   

**A:**  Probably, that was after 1956 when the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up and there was some pressure from the Chinese side. It was done at the end of 1956 or in 1957.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it before that?   

**A:**  I don't think so.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for reforming the dzong?   

**A:**  The Chinese were saying that they are going to implement the reforms. We didn't know for sure what the communist reforms would be like. Actually, they were very harsh and some people might have known that they would eliminate everything and everything would be done [controlled] by the government and they would set up the cooperatives and communes. But at that time, people in Tibet were thinking that they [Chinese] might not do exactly like that. The Chinese were also not saying directly that they are going to do like that. They were just showing the appearance of doing something [gradually]. From the Tibetan side, we were thinking that it was going to be sort of okay [Tib. ཨའུ་ཙམ་མིན་འགྲོ] and we said that we will implement the reforms and the government would manage the dzongs directly. In the past, the dzongpön were sent to the dzong and they made the miser have a hard time and embezzled a lot. They just delivered a small amount [of what they collected] to the government. So after the dzong management was taken over by the government, the dzongpön were paid a salary so they had to deliver all the income to the government without embezzling and causing hardship to the miser. The government was thinking that the Chinese would be pleased because this reform was done well. But the Chinese didn't like it because they wanted to eliminate everything.   

**Q:**  This reform was implemented from our side, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Our government said that we are going to implement the reforms by ourselves. They couldn't say that we are eliminating all the monastic estates and estates that belonged to the aristocrats and were going to set up communes, so they didn't say that.   

**Q:**  I heard that in 1951 the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama and Ngabö were made the members of the People's Political Consultative Conference in China. Did you hear anything about this?   

**A:**  I didn't know this.   

**Q:**  Then I heard that probably the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama didn't go [for this to China] and [instead] sent their representatives and they set up a liaison office in Beijing. Was there a liaison office there?   

**A:**  Yes, there was. But it was not really a liaison office.   

**Q:**  What did they call the office then?   

**A:**  They called it a "Bureau" or thönjo. It was there from early times [before the Communists]. One of the representatives in the Bureau was Thubden Sangye [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་སངས་རྒྱས] and Dzasa Gyetag [Tib. dza sag rgys stag] also went there. Before that, our late Uncle Yingön Dzasa [Tib. དབྱིངས་མགོན] was sent. Later, he became a representative in the Bureau. When we went to China, the representative was our Uncle Yingön.   

**Q:**  What was their work?   

**A:**  Their work was like that of an ambassador. Probably they were sending back and forth information from China to Tibet. Otherwise, they didn't have much important work to do.   

**Q:**  It was also said during the Reting incident the Bureau in China [comment was unfinished].   

**A:**  Probably, Reting sent a telegraph message to Chiang Kaishek requesting his support because he was getting bullied [Tib. དབང་ཡོད་བཏང] and probably, they [Kashag] called the representatives of the [Beijing] Bureau and asked what was happening there and they did a kind of investigation. Then the representatives got frightened and went up quickly and said that Reting had done such and such serious things. Then they arrested Reting.   

**Q:**  I asked Kungö Rinchenla about this, but want to ask you also when did they set up the Foreign Office [Tib. ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས] of the Tibetan government? Was that a new office or was it there from early times?   

**A:**  In the early times, there wasn't any office called the Foreign Office. But probably there was an office dealing with outsiders. Probably, Phünkang Sawangchemmo was in that office. It was probably in 1942-43 that the Foreign Office was formally set up.   

**Q:**  At that time, who were the officials working in that office?   

**A:**  The first was Surkhang Dzasa [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་ཛ་སག]. I remember the Foreign Office was already set up in 1944. In that year an American Correspondent came to Lhasa called Mr. [A.T.] Steele [of the Chicago Daily News]. At that time, I was appointed as his guide and I had to go wherever he went, like visiting the Dalai Lama, or the tsipön and the drunyichemmo, the Kashag and the Foreign Office. [NOTE: A short section was deleted at request of the interviewee]   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrived, what happened to the Foreign Office?   

**A:**  Before the Chinese, there was the Guomindang. They didn't go to [use] the Foreign Office at all. They had an interpreter who was born in Tibet and he spoke both Chinese and Tibetan fluently. He used to wear a Chinese robe. His name was Trewangla [Tib. བཀྲས་དབང་ལགས]. He used to come to the Kashag when there was something the Chinese had to tell the Kashag. At that time, I used to report to the Kashag that Trewangla wants to visit the Kashag. They never went to the Foreign Office. After the new Chinese arrived, of course they wouldn't go to the Foreign Office. Furthermore, they put pressure and merged the [Tibetan] Foreign Office with their [own office]. At that time Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] was there. A photo of Liushar came out in Tharchinla's [Tib. མཐར་ཕིན་ལགས] newspaper wearing a monk's robe with the yellow satin overcoat called Dakuazi [Ch. da gua zi] and the water bottle [Tib. ཆབ་བླུག] hanging at the front. He was a third rank dzasa. In the newspaper, they had attached a parrot's head to replace his human head. Probably, it implied that he was friendly with the Chinese. At that time, my late father's photo with his Army Uniform also came out in that newspaper in an article that was written about his accomplishments.   

**Q:**  I am not sure about something in the 17-Point Agreement. One of the points was that the Tibetan soldiers will be merged with the Chinese soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  After that, what happened to the Tibetan soldiers? Were they merged into the Chinese soldiers or did they still exist under the Kashag?   

**A:**  This issue was also not certain. It just implied that they are going to do that, but actually it was not done. They made the soldiers of the Gusung [bodyguard] Regiment wear a uniform like the Chinese soldier's uniform, but it was not exactly the same. All of the Tibetan military officers were made to wear Chinese uniforms. Some of the coats were blue like the Russians with big caps. Later on, the people disliked the Chinese more and more. Uncle Ragashag also wore the uniform for a year. I heard that the military officers of the Trapchi Regiment discussed that all of us should wear Tibetan chupa on the night of the Butter Sculpture Festival on the 15th of the 1st Tibetan month [Tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ]. And they also wore the long boots and army fur caps and the other military officers also wore the same. At that time, the depöns were Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] and Ragashag. They discussed that the depön would also wear Tibetan chupa with the silk thread color lining and red silk ribbons. This was done to show their dislike of the Chinese Army. At that time, the Tibetan soldiers were not merged into the Chinese soldiers.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese say that the soldiers should not carry the Tibetan flag?   

**A:**  I am not sure what they did in the end. Otherwise, the Tibetan soldiers were carrying the Tibetan flag as well as the Chinese flag. The Chinese might have disliked it, but I think they didn't leave the Tibetan flag for good.   

**Q:**  At that time, Ragashag was the magji, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about Ngabö?   

**A:**  Ngabö was not a magji, but probably he was something from the Chinese side. I saw him wearing a Chinese army uniform. This was later on.   

**Q:**  So the Tibetan soldiers were not completely merged into the Chinese soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were unable to merge the Tibetan soldiers into their army and teach them their drills.   

**Q:**  Was there a talk about setting up a special military Committee [speaking English]?   

**A:**  I am not sure about this. Probably, there was such a talk and there was a kind of Military Headquarter [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ལས་ཁུངས] where Ngabö and those people were. They might have talked about merging the Tibetan army, but they delayed day by day. In 1956, the Dalai Lama came to India, and there was a lot of trouble and Zhou Enlai said that he will make the policy cordial. In 1957, there was trouble from the Khambas so they were unable to merge the Tibetan soldiers into the Chinese army. Furthermore, some of the soldiers from the Trapchi and the Gusung Regiments also went with the Khambas.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you about schools in the old society and the changes in the education system after the Chinese arrived. Before the Chinese arrival, what did they teach in the schools in Lhasa?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth, the education in the early times was very poor. Mainly they only taught handwriting. At that time, people had to have a good and quick handwriting because there were no type-writers. Normally, they would teach prayers such as the "taking refuge [Tib. སྐྱབས་འགྲོ] prayers" to the protector deities [Tib. གསེར་སྐྱེམ], and the Ganden Lhagya [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྷ་བརྒྱ] and Mönlam Namgye [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་རྣམ་བརྒྱད] in the morning and the students would have to learn these by heart and they didn't teach the meaning of the prayers. When we practiced handwriting, we just had to copy some verses. At that time in our school they didn't teach the Tibetan math system that was called Diu, or poems or grammar. When one's handwriting passed, then school was finished. After that, we would have to hire private teachers like Geshe monks and people who had a good knowledge to learn the grammar and poetics.   

**Q:**  How about the education system after the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  After that, they appointed teachers in the schools according to the modern system and they taught several subjects like Tibetan, poetry and grammar. And they made textbooks for the different classes. Different teachers were also chosen from among the better people and they taught handwriting, religion, grammar and poetry. This was done well.   

**Q:**  At that time, how many schools did the Chinese set up?   

**A:**  At first they set up only the Seshing [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ] School. After that, they also set up a school near Lhalu. Probably, Seshing was a boy's school and the school in Lhalu was a girl's school.   

**Q:**  In the old society, there weren't any separate schools for boys and girls, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The boys and girls were together.   

**Q:**  Did they teach other subjects in the school?   

**A:**  I am not sure, but probably they were teaching some Chinese subjects also.   

**Q:**  Since the Chinese set up the schools, did they taught Chinese history, Marxism and songs?   

**A:**  Yes, they taught Chinese songs. In the 1st-2nd-3rd grades, they didn't teach much [history], but they taught the Chinese characters because this was the basis for the future when they grew up [and the Chinese] would educate them. Probably, they were educating the small boys a little about those things [history]. After that, they also set up a school in Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] for adults and there they taught poetry and grammar and probably Chinese characters. Probably they gave some lectures to educate people about the Communist Party. Normally, they would show movies and sometimes they would hold evening gatherings [Tib. མཚན་ཙོགས] where meetings were held and they would serve Chinese tea. The Chinese officials would give lectures of indoctrination and say that we should go on the revolutionary path. After that, they would take a break and then they would show movies about the People's Liberation Army soldiers making war against the Guomindang, and how the People's Liberation Army made good relations with the farmers and how the Guomindang lost and the Communists won the victory and the peasants welcomed them. These were all for educating people. Later, they also set up a cadre training school [Tib. ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་སྦྱོང་ཁང], but I don't have any details to tell you about that. They also talked a lot about how the Chinese will educate the Kudrak in Trungji Linga and they had to come to stay there for the cadre training, but later because of the Khamba's disturbance and the Dalai Lama's trip to India, the situation was made a little bit more cordial. After that they didn't do much education.   

**Q:**  What were they [Chinese] saying they are going to do with the government officials?   

**A:**  They meant that they were going to educate the government officials and recruit them in the ranks of cadres.   

**Q:**  Did they set up a place for educating them?   

**A:**  It was said the place was in Trungji Linga. I heard that they were making a lot of chairs and beds saying that those were for the Kudrak.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival, did they set up printing houses?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. This was their main propaganda. I am not sure where it was set up. They also set up a newspaper.   

**Q:**  Was it in Chinese?   

**A:**  It was a Tibetan Newspaper. They had to make the propaganda through the newspapers. At that time there weren't many people who knew Chinese, so the newspaper was in Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Who was controlling the Radio Broadcasts?   

**A:**  The Tibetans didn't have anything to do with the Radio Broadcasts.   

**Q:**  Didn't they select the Radio Announcers from Lhasa?   

**A:**  They [the Chinese] selected Tibetan Radio announcers and there were also many Tibetans editors on the Newspaper like Tshatru Rimpoche [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] who used to be my teacher. Kapshö Sey [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་སྲས] was also there.   

**Q:**  Did Tshatru Rimpoche have any relations with the Tshatrutsang family?   

**A:**  Probably, Tshatru Rimpoche was a separate branch [Tib. ཟུར་པ], but I am not sure how they got split off from Rimpoche. At that time, Rimpoche kind of left the family.   

**Q:**  Was Kapshö Sey among the radio broadcasters?   

**A:**  No. He was in the Newspaper office [Tib. ཚགས་པར་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**Q:**  Who were the people working in the Broadcast office?   

**A:**  I heard that they hired some Tibetans.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chinese also set up a Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ], right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was set up early because it was the place where people were educated. They served tea and food and made them dance and play football, so the youth liked that. They also held evening gatherings like a night club. At those gatherings the Chinese gave lectures and educated people.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, how did they set up the Youth League?   

**A:**  Probably, several people gathered and said we should set up the Youth League. They needed to make it famous and make many people join it. They also told some famous officials to be associated with it and to give instructions to the Youth League. They told them that this would be very useful. So like this they invited Yabshi Langdün [Tib. གླང་མདུན] and the Silön. My father was also called there. Tshawa Tritrü [Tib. ཚ་བ་ཁྲི་སྤྲུལ] and Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] were also called. Janglojen was eloquent and he praised the Chinese. At that time in the Youth League they used to say that Janglojen and Tshatru Rimpoche were going to give lectures when they called people to attend.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was the Youth League and also the Women's Association [Tib. བུད་མེད་ཚོགས་པ], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did they set these things up in the beginning? Who called those people and who joined these associations?   

**A:**  I don't have anything certain to tell you about this. But since I was there at that time, I could guess something. In 1951 after the Chinese arrived, they said that we should set up a Youth League. Probably the Chinese might have made the policy and explained how to set it up. In the beginning, Shölkang Jedrung [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང] was there and probably there were some other Tibetans. The main person working in the Youth League and calling people to come was a Chinese man who spoke Tibetan well. He was called Wuzu. Normally, he would go everywhere, like with the Women's Association and deliver the messages and meddle in the Youth League. He used to say pleasant sounding things and say that so and so directors [Ch. bu zhang] said that it would be very good to join the Youth League. He also threatened people and also said some things tactfully. Gradually, people were made to get involved in the Youth League. After the Youth League was set up and there weren't many people joining it, the Chinese laid down another policy telling the famous officials to give instruction to the youth. At that time, they were called the "friends" of the Youth [Tib. གཞོན་ནུའི་མཐུན་གྲོགས]. Probably it was a kind of supporter. They came to our households and invited my father to do this. Whenever they held the meetings of the Youth League, they would call them and make them give lectures after which the youths would dance Western dances. It was made kind of like a club and the young people liked it because there wasn't such entertainment in the past. In this way, people were involved in the Youth League bringing in their friends.   

**Q:**  Who was the leader of the Youth League?   

**A:**  Probably, Shölkang Jedrung was the chairman.   

**Q:**  Were there people in the Youth League who didn't like the previous government and liked the revolution and wanted reforms?   

**A:**  Probably they talked like this because the Chinese had educated them. They didn't say anything openly and seriously to oppose [the Tibetan government]. But they might have said a lot about how the new system should be set up and was done very well in China so it would be very good if we could do this in Tibet. Therefore, we should use our strength and make it work.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Tibetan government summoned Shölkang Jedrung and there was trouble in the past. What was that about?   

**A:**  That happened before the Communists arrived. It occurred in the years 1943-44.   

**Q:**  What was the trouble?   

**A:**  At that time, I and my uncle Ragashag, Shölkang Targye La [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་ལགས] and many others were playing football. Shölkang Jedrung [a monk official] was very fond of such things like riding bicycles and motorcycles and playing football. So probably the drunyichemmo heard about Shölkang Jedrung doing all of these things. His father, the Tseja, had a close relation with the monk officials and he might have met the drunyichemmo and probably, he told them, "My son is doing these things. So please tell him something." After that, he might have been called to the Yigtsang office where they [the drunyichemmo] kind of scolded him and said, "You can't do things like this. This is a disgrace to monk officials." They didn't like this, but Shölkang Jedrung was very fond of these things and he also played tennis well. In the winter, he also used to do ice skating. So they might have scolded him again. In general, at the time of the Regent Taktra, it was said that people were not allowed to play footballs and ride bicycles. People didn't like this, although they didn't dare to say anything. There was also a problem when he [Shölkang Jedrung] took a photo. I was with him at that time. This was the first time when the Dalai Lama went to Drepung for the ceremony to enter the monk's order [Tib. ཆོས་ཞུགས]. At that time, there were many people in the procession and he took photos and I also took photos, but I did it surreptitiously. Shölkang was going to have a bad luck and he probably took the photos conspicuously. So I heard that probably Taktra and those people who didn't like him saw that and they told him that he is not allowed to take photos and they confiscated his camera. After that, probably, the Drönyerchemmo (Lord Chamberlain) might have cornered him.   

**Q:**  Did he have to go to the Tse gaa (the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama) [Tib. རྩེ་འགག]?   

**A:**  Yes. He was called there and they told him, "You have done a very serious thing so as punishment you have to prostrate during the drungja for 7 days. So he had to prostrate for 7 days. And probably he was also demoted to the rank of an ordinary monk official. Therefore he might have been frustrated. Secondly, his usual character was kind of carefree and happy-go-lucky. So when he wanted to play mahjong, he would just go ahead and play. He would never put his money somewhere and keep it. He would spend all of the money right away. He also used to go everywhere and he didn't have a fixed place to sleep. He would go to Tsarong, Yabshi, Surkhang and everywhere. Sometimes he didn't go home for about 10 days.   

**Q:**  Similarly, were there other youths who didn't like the old system?   

**A:**  Probably, I am sure they didn't like it.   

**Q:**  Who else was there in the Youth League like Shölkang and other Kudrak?   

**A:**  I think Samdru Lingpa [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་གླིང་པ] [Samling] was one of the active persons in the Youth League. I didn't stay much in Lhasa, so I didn't hear about any other people in there. There were also some trader's children like Sharlho Tashi Norbu [Tib. ཤར་ལྷོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ནོར་བུ] in the Youth League. At that time, probably, there were a lot of children who were liked by the Chinese and felt kind of proud [about this] and thought they were big shots.   

**Q:**  Similarly, the Women's Association was also set up, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was done in the same way as the Youth League.   

**Q:**  At that time, who and who joined the Women's Association?   

**A:**  All of the famous women were in there like the wife of the Silön and the wife of Surkhang. Yabshi Lhajam Tsering Drolma [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་ལྷ་ལྕམ་ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ] was probably the chairperson. The Secretary was probably Grandmother Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང]. If you ask her, she can tell you all the members. Wuzu was also involved in the Women's Association. He was too smart and later in 1958 he was also sent to Kalimpong and he purposely came to bother my father. At that time, we were staying in India so he came to apply mud on us. The Indian intelligence was watching us and if they saw a Chinese coming to us, they would be suspicious. I heard that he also arrived at Switzerland because there were many Tibetans there in 1962-63 after the liberation. Everybody knew him because he would go to all the households like the traders. He knew all the names of the traders and their family members. He was not a high ranking official.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrived, were any reforms implemented regarding the monastic estates and the estates that belonged to the aristocrats?   

**A:**  There weren't any reforms concerning the estates. They didn't take back our estates and make them into cooperatives. There would have been some reforms, but when the Dalai Lama went to India, the reforms were postponed and the people in the Tibet Autonomous Region also went back to China. Then in 1956-57, there was the Khamba's disturbance and in 1959 everything was finished. So they didn't have time to do that.   

**Q:**  Even if they actually didn't implement the reforms, was there any kind of fear that the reforms will be implemented?   

**A:**  Yes, there was. It was said that the reforms are going to take place and people had already given up [Tib. བློས་བཏང] everything. This was because the Tibetan government didn't have the strength and everything had gone under Chinese control. The government had to do whatever the Chinese told them to do. Even when a speech was made, the Chinese would make the draft and give it to them. When the Dalai Lama went to China, all of his speeches were prepared by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  So at that time, people mentally gave up everything right?   

**A:**  Yes. They already gave up everything saying that there is nothing we can do. In the deeper level of their minds they had a serious dislike of the Chinese. Finally their dislike came to the surface and the revolt was launched.   

**Q:**  Didn't people think that the 17-Point Agreement that was signed said that will be no changes and the Dalai Lama's government will remain as before and that we have religious freedom so the reform will not take place and we don't need to be afraid of it?   

**A:**  Probably, there were some people thinking in that way, but actually the Chinese were doing a lot of things that violated the 17-Point Agreement. They were kind of powerful and it became like the 17-Point was kind of lost and people were afraid that something [bad] will happen. At that time, people didn't have any chance to argue about the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  At that time, they didn't reform the estates, but since the Chinese were there, did the (Tibetan) government reduce the interests that the peasants (miser) had to pay?   

**A:**  Probably, they did. This was called Loan Investigation [Tib. བུན་ཞིབ]. Long before the Chinese arrived, the Tibetan government thought that the miser were facing hardship so they did a loan investigation. My late father and the Drönyerchemmo did that investigation. I forget his name. This was done in 1936 when my late father was in charge of building the Trisam [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ] Bridge. All of the old loans that people were unable to pay were exempted. While he was working in Trisam, he started doing it [that reform] around that place. One of the staff on this was my late brother Taring. They did a lot of loan investigations. I am not sure whether they did loan investigations after the Chinese arrived.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chinese were saying that revolution and reform must be implemented. I heard that from the Tibetan government side some reforms were implemented. Did they implement any reform?   

**A:**  Probably, they meant the reforms done by the Tibetan government that placed the Tibetan government in control of managing the dzong. Before that, dzongpön were appointed and they would get all the income remaining after they delivered the [listed] income to the government. So the dzongpön had a lot of income for themselves according to the amount of the income of the dzong. After that, when a dzong was managed by the government, this system was supposed to have been abolished. The dzongpön were paid a salary and they had to collect the income and deliver it to the government without causing hardship to the people. This was one of the reforms. I wonder what else they reformed. I don't know about any other reforms implemented by the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  In what year was this reform implemented?   

**A:**  Probably in 1956 after the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that done before the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  No. It was after the Chinese had already arrived. After the Chinese arrived, they were saying that reforms must be implemented. But what the Chinese meant by reforms was to set up the communes and rob everything according to the Communist Party's policy. The Tibetans must have thought of the 17-Point Agreement and they thought that it won't be alright if we don't implement any reforms at all. If we implemented this much of reforms, then it would be okay. This was a kind of a method for stopping the Chinese from implementing their [kind of] reforms. They thought that if we implemented reforms, the Chinese won't need to do it.   

**Q:**  Were there any comments on this reform from the Chinese side?   

**A:**  Probably, there wasn't any comment on this. They just kind of disregarded it [Tib. གའི་བརྩིས་ཡོད་མ་རེད]. Probably they didn't say that it was good.   

**Q:**  At that time, I heard that the Chinese opened some banks.   

**A:**  Yes. They opened the Bank of China.   

**Q:**  Did they open it in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. They opened it in the house called Kyitöpa where the Guomindang used to have their offices. There was also a bank in Calcutta. It must be a branch. When they sent a check from here, the money was paid in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  What work did the bank do?   

**A:**  They just did regular bank work. You could also open an account and have a savings account.   

**Q:**  Were there people making saving deposits?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. We also did something like a government certificate of deposit or like a bond.   

