# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0007.01  
##  : Phurbu Chogba [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་མཆོག་པ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Sogang, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Ben Jiao  
**Name:** Phurbu Chogba [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་མཆོག་པ]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 51  
**Date of Birth:** 1949  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The subject was born in the old society to a very poor family. In this interview, she discusses how her mother's family ran away from their heavy corvée taxes, and how a few years before 1959, when she was seven or eight years old, their whereabouts were discovered [by the lord] and she had to go to serve at her mother's lord's place. She talks about staying there for five or six years until after the democratic reforms, and then returned home to her village, attended school where she learned to read and write Tibetan, and then went to another school in 1965 to study math. Finally, she discusses how during the Cultural Revolution she separated from her family and became an activist, joined the Communist Party, and became the head of Xiang Women's Federation.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0007_01/OR_0007_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Your family was called Trawogpa [Tib. ?], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before the reforms, was your family a servant or a treba?   

**A:**  I was from a very poor family. Before 1959, my father was the gyewo of the Sogang and my mother was from Tsongdu Shiga of Shigatse County, Gyatso Chu.   

**Q:**  How did they come here?   

**A:**  When the Krungdu Shiga made my mother's family suffer a lot, they were unable to stay there, so they hide their belongings in the mountains and fled to this area. They covered the cows with a white chupa and brought them, and we came here and we stayed in Mönkhar [Tib. སྨོན་མཁར]. So my father and mother met here, and they got together and set up a new household.   

**Q:**  How did they get together?   

**A:**  My mother usually worked as a servant of the household called Shölpa and they got together.   

**Q:**  Did they have to pay mibo?   

**A:**  My father had to pay the mibo but since my mother had run away, they [her lord] didn't know she was here. My mother got some foods or grain by spinning wool for other households and my father received some payment in grain by plowing fields for Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] Shiga. From this grain income they fed and raised their children. Life was very hard at that time. For a while, the Krungdu Shiga did not find out where my mother and her parents were. But a few years before 1959, the Shiga found my mother's parents and took them back to the shiga. My mother was able to stay here, but I had to replace her and go with my grandparents to fulfill the corvée and taxes to the Krungdu Shiga. I was about 7 or 8 years old. My father's elder brother was married to a treba household. Later when his wife died, he and my parents combined the two families as one and formed a fraternal polyandrous family. When I was in Krungdu Shiga, I had to work very hard for the shiga. Though I was too young to do adult work in the shiga, I had to do trifling work like taking out fertilizer. If I did not work hard, the lord would beat me. For example, during the harvest time, I and many other children had to pick up grain ears in the harvested field. If I picked up less than other children, I would be whipped. I stayed there for 5 to 6 years when the gyarshib was almost done.   

**Q:**  How did they start the reforms?   

**A:**  When the reform was done in 1959, I was small and staying down there while my parents took the land here. Since I missed my parents a lot, I told my grandparents that I did not want to stay there any more, so they called my mother to pick me up. One day, while I was working in the threshing place, a woman came to me and asked me where my grandparents were. Since I did not recognized who she was, I asked her where she had came from and why she wanted to see my grandparents. The moment she heard my questions, she cried and told me that she was my mother. I felt so sad that I did not recognized my own mother whom I missed day and night. I could not control myself and I also cried. My mother stayed there for few days. During that time, I was unable to work well because I was so afraid that my mother would leave there again. Therefore, I always made sure that she was taking me with her. In fact, we came back to our village together.   

**A:**  What did you feel when you met your mother?   

**A:**  I felt very sad and I cried.   

**A:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 51. During the gyarshib, I came here and they called many monks and nuns. I was very happy to came back home. When the first school was established in our village, my parents sent me to the school.   

**Q:**  What school was it?   

**A:**  It was a Community School [Tib. དམངས་བཙུགས་སློབ་གྲྭ].   

**Q:**  How many years did you go to school for?   

**A:**  I stayed in the school from the reforms until graduation. At the beginning, since most people from the lower class were illiterate, the school had people from the high ranking class [Tib. མཐོ་རིམ] teach us. Later, when the masses grew up and there was a teacher from among the masses, they fired the high ranking teachers because it was considered that a teacher from a high class might not teach the lower class kids well. So during those days, my teachers were changed three times.   

**Q:**  What did they mostly teach? And to which teacher did you go to study?   

**A:**  I went to study with the teacher called Dzopa and mostly they taught us how to write Tibetan and how to read newspapers. In the end I was able to write and read a little, and could stand on my feet. I went to another school in Jogro [Tib. ལྕོག་རོ] which was very close to Panam County and mainly studied math there until 1966.   

**Q:**  Who sent you to the school? What was the reason for sending you?   

**A:**  At the end of 1965, our xiang zhang named Gyalpo [Tib. རྒྱལ་པོ] sent me to the school. He came to my family and told me that "You should go to another school to study the math. We think that it will be good that children from poor families get good education and became cadres in our area. Plus, the commune will be started in this area soon and the brigade will need someone to do calculations." When I saw and experienced more new things, I started to realize that my parents, my grandparents, and myself had a great hardship and suffering in the old society. I felt that under the New Society the poor people would gradually have better lives in the future. After spending four months in the new school [not finished].   

**Q:**  What did you learn there and how old were you then?   

**A:**  I learned math and I was 14 years old. I came back to my village. In 1966, the "Three Great Educations [Tib. སློབ་གསོ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ]" [campaign] had started and I became an activist. And I also joined the Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་སྡེ་ཚོགས].   

**Q:**  How did you become the activist?   

**A:**  After I got some basic education in Jogro I became a very selfless person and all of my thoughts were to do a good job for the public. With other younger people in the village, we helped those poor families in our village in many different ways and conducted various activities. For example, during the harvest time, we helped poor families to cut their barley. During the drought season, we carried water from far away places to water poor families' fields. When a poor family did not have enough food, although my family was quite poor, I stole some tsamba from my home and gave it to the poor. Sometimes, from the beginning to the end of the harvest, we voluntarily organized young people to watch the fields with crops the whole night to prevent stealing. So a group of people became activists.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did you think?   

**A:**  I studied the three main works of Chairman Mao, like about Dr. Bethuen, and I had the thought of serving the people.   

**Q:**  Didn't your parents stop you from doing this?   

**A:**  Yes they did, and they even didn't make me woolen boots and made to go barefooted. During this time, the war between China and India started. Most young people from our village joined the militia. We thought some day we might need to go to war so we used all the leisure time to do military training. One night, Phurbu Tsering [Tib. phur bu ytshe ring], a man from our village, got appendicitis which was unable to be treated in our area. So we decided to take him to the County People's Hospital. It was dark and raining heavily. Since it was impossible to get a vehicle to take him to the county, we took off a door and placed Phurbu Tsering on it. Four young men carried the door and others carried the candles. We walked about 30 kilometers and got him to the hospital. The County Hospital said that they were unable to treat him, so again we walked and took him to the Shigatse Prefecture Hospital, which was a one hour drive by car. After he had the operation, the doctor told us that the patient needed more blood. After testing our blood types, none of us matched his blood type, so we had to send two people back to our village by crossing several big mountains. When they got there, there were many young people willing to give their blood, but they picked several people who were relatives of him and passed mountains to come back to Shigatse. After transfusing the blood to him, he survived. Now he is still alive. The youths were not like nowadays, where they have hatred and jealousy. Because I did not have time to work for my own family, my parents complained to me lot. They were saying that, "Our daughter is not helpful to the family." In order to prevent me from going outside, they did not make clothing and shoes for me. Still I refused to stay at home and was actively involved in those activities. I went to military training and other activities in my bare feet. Nowadays, I cannot imagine how come I had such energy and courage. Since I became an activist, I joined Communist Youth League in 1966.   

**Q:**  How did they make you join the Youth League and how old were you then?   

**A:**  I was 14 years old. A few months [years] later, I became a member of Communist Party at the age of 17.   

**Q:**  Did you request to become a Party Member?   

**A:**  Yes. On my application form for the Communist Party, it said that I was qualified to be a member of the Communist Party. However, my age was one year less than the qualification age.   

**Q:**  What did your parents say?   

**A:**  My parents asked me why I became a leader since at the time of the Three Great Educations campaign, the cadres were made to suffer a lot. I was very proud to be an activist. At the same time, I was selected as the head [Ch. zhuren] of the Xiang Women's Federation. Since then my work has been involved with women and families. Because the villagers had to depend on work points and could not do diverse economic activities, such as working for wage labor, trading, and bartering during that time, the farmer families had a hard time with their livelihood. So on one side, the Women's Federation educated women who had the main responsibility for preparing and providing foods in the families to properly manage the families' livelihood. On the other side, the Federation reported to the higher Authorities about people's hardships. Some of the women didn't get to hold meetings and were saying that when we were holding meetings, we would just talk about being economical [Tib. གྲོན་ཆུང]. When some woman intruded between the couples [had affairs], I cut off their ration grain for the time being, because they didn't tell who was the father of the illegitimate child. After cutting off the grain, they would tell who was the father of the child. I also fined the father of the child. I had been working for 36 years on women's work. My parents were strongly against me becoming an activist and especially becoming a member of the Communist Party. They thought my goal of becoming a cadre was really not a good idea because when they saw those senior cadres being criticized and held in custody to re-think their "mistakes" during the "three education" period, they thought I might have same result as they did. So my parents told me, "You know how much those senior cadres suffered during the 'three education' period. Now you have become a member of the Communist Party, so this makes your family and relatives worry about your future. If you do not stop here, one day you will became a subject of most people's criticizing." Since I did not actually see how those senior cadres were badly treated because I was in the new school at the time, and since I was young and full of enthusiasm, and plus there were so many other young activists in the village to back me, I did not listen to my parents. I did not believe that I would have the same outcome.   

**Q:**  How did they set up the People's Commune?   

**A:**  In 1967 the county government set up a People's Commune in Düjung Xiang as an experiment. Our xiang sent some people to see how it was done. Our village sent two people (one woman and one man) with them. When they came back, they started to establish the commune in our xiang in 1968. In the beginning, it was said that establishing the commune in a village meant the members had to turn their land, animals and farming tools into the commune and that their livelihood would totally depend on the work points. In our village it took a while for people to join the commune. The meeting to set up the commune in our village was held in a big yard surrounded by a stone wall. The yard had two gates, one was an entrance and the other one an exit. Each family sent one representative to the meeting. It was said that if a representative entered the entrance of the yard and stayed there, that meant his or her family would join the commune. However, if the representative exited the yard, that meant his family would not join the commune. At that meeting, the head of our village told people that establishing the People's Commune in our village was a good thing for all people and it was our ideal that everyone should join it. He also mentioned that the commune would give a good chance to those poor families to have a good life. The poor families who did not have much land, animals, farming tools, and manpower would enjoy the advantages of the commune by sharing commune lands, animals, farming tools, and manpower. At first, there were some families who wanted to join the commune, but there were also some other families did not want to join the commune. The man who was sent to Düjung to see how the commune was established joined the commune. However, the woman who had gone to Düjung, whose name was Migmar Tsamjö [Tib. མིག་དམར་མཚམས་གཅོད], said that she did not want to join the commune.   

**Q:**  Why did she say that?   

**Q:**  Who knows? Migmar Tsamjö was a single woman, who was a close friend of mine. I said to them that, "If Migmar Tsamjö does not join the commune, then I will also not join it." So both of us walked away from the yard. When we were sitting in her room and discussing the event, I asked her, "Do you think it is a good idea for both of us to not join the commune? Since we are members of the village leadership, it might have a bad impact or set a bad example for other people." She told me that since we were single women households who did not have any manpower, we would not get many grain rations [Tib. བཟའ་འབྲུ] from the commune. It was said that the grain ration per member of the commune would be 12 khe of grain (336 jin of grain) [per year]. While we were having this conversation, the head of the village came in. The moment he entered the door, he yelled at us, "Why did you two not join the commune? It is really shameful that you two became the obstacle of other people joining the People's Commune in this village. Do you two really not want to join the commune? You two should think about it this way. Even if you do not get a lot of grain rations from the commune, you will still get more work point grain [Tib. སྐར་འབྲུ]." I said to him, "If I do not get enough grain ration grain, I will have a hard time in the future. Since I cannot do wage labor beside the commune work, I really worry about my food. If the commune provides enough work point grain, then it might be different." He said, "You won't have any problems. You will have a lot of work points in the commune. If you have a lot work points, then you will get more grain. You two are thinking in a very opposite way." So then I told Migmar Tsamjö that we should join the commune. In the end, all families in our village joined the commune and our village was divided into two rukhag. However, some high class families were not allowed to stay in the commune at first. Instead, those families were set aside for a while. Later they were allowed to join in.   

**Q:**  While you were holding the meeting in the courtyard, who was mobilizing the people?   

**A:**  It was the Zhuren Migmar who mobilized the meeting. Later, the Party Secretary of Chunub called Norbu Tsering also mobilized the people a lot.   

**Q:**  How did the people say that they were joining the commune by entering the eastern gate and leaving the commune through the western?   

**A:**  The masses just said that, but the leaders didn't tell them to do that.   

**Q:**  Were there more people joining the commune or were there more people leaving?   

**A:**  Later, all the people joined.   

**Q:**  How about at the beginning?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there were quite a lot of people who joined, but after the boy and the girl from the Düjung went separate ways, people left the commune. Later, when some leaders joined the commune, most of people joined and after that some of people who didn't behave well, were driven out from the commune. They were set aside and called ex-commune members.   

**Q:**  When and how did they start the Cultural Revolution?   

**Q:**  It was started after the commune. They went through the motions of talking about the monsters and demons, and superstitions, and they took the ngadag, the ngatsab and the people among the masses who had strong superstition, around the street putting paper caps on them. And the people went through the motions of shouting the slogans,"Completely destroy the monsters and the demons and the people in power in the party." All of the religious superstitious things in the households were taken out and burned.   

**Q:**  How did they call the masses to do such things?   

**A:**  They divided the youths. and one group was sent to Kharka and the others to Chugong and Sogang. At that time, Nyamdre came to mobilize people and Gyenlo also came to mobilize people. Both of the groups were saying that they were holding up the flag of Chairman Mao highly. As for me, being just a child, I didn't know have any ideas.   

**Q:**  Did the cadres of the county come and hold the meetings?   

**A:**  They didn't hold big meetings, but the leaders came to mobilize and the masses would attend these meetings. Even if the zhuren of the village called a meeting, the masses would have to attend. For example, if Gyenlo was holding a meeting somewhere, when they were called, the masses would go even though they didn't know what was going on there. There was a militia leader named Tsedrub who was kind of suspected by the masses of being Gyenlo, and the masses were saying that we were kind of Nyamdre. I also said that "Maybe I will come with you, otherwise, I don't have any ideas." There was no fighting in our place.   

**A:**  How were they involved in Nyamdre?   

**A:**  The people from the group came up and they mobilized them. There was a person called Phurbu Wangdü.   

**Q:**  Were those people Chinese or Tibetan?   

**A:**  They were Tibetan. There were no Chinese. There was a Tibetan called Phurbu Wangdü who came and people said, "Just leave him like this. He might be Gyenlo."   

**Q:**  Did the people say that Nyamdre was better or that Gyenlo was better?   

**A:**  People were saying the Nyamdre was the better one. As I was young, I didn't have any idea because both of the organizations were masses' organizations. No matter that they said that we should destroy the people in power, there was a big disturbance and some capable people were ruined. Finally, they set up the Revolutionary Committees.   

**Q:**  Did they destroy the Sogang Monastery before that or later?   

**A:**  It was destroyed long before that when the reforms occurred, and at the time of the gyarshib there were no nuns in there. I found a container for melting butter for butter lamps there, but people said that it would not be right to keep this in an activist's house, so I burned it.   

**Q:**  Did the activists take out the religious objects or did the masses themselves do that?   

**A:**  There were not many people doing it voluntarily. The activists did that and there were not many people stealing things in our place. In this place, during the Cultural Revolution, they just destroyed the religious objects, but they didn't cut the hair short, and take off and smash people's coral earrings. I was the zhuren of the Women's Association and I told the activists not to carry scissors and take away the coral earrings, and I also was not going to do that. The people could keep them or sell them if they liked I said that "The people should join the revolution voluntarily and you should not make enemies." So people voluntarily took off their earrings and there was no fighting about this in the xiang. Now, some people are saying, "During the Cultural Revolution, the activists did a lot and they made us suffer." I am eloquent but I said, "Even Chairman Mao said that the Cultural Revolution was wrong so if now you were told to put the paper caps on us who put the paper caps on others, we will wear it and go wherever you want us to go." Then they kept quite.   

**Q:**  Were you wearing a blue uniform or a chupa?   

**A:**  I was wearing very bad chupa with patches on it. I didn't have good chupa like nowadays. At that time, the family members didn't make any clothes.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because my parents always criticized me and they did not make clothing and shoes for me, I decided to split from my family at the end of 1966. I told my parent that, "I want to do thorough revolution so now I want to live separately on the a roof under projection verandah [Tib. གྱབ] located on the top of our house, so you should give me my share." They agreed with my decision and gave me a small plot of land, a few cooking utensils, a very small bag of tsamba [barley flour], a little salt, and butter. My family did not give me much grain and furniture. They thought that if they did not give me much grain, clothing and furniture, I would encounter great difficulties surviving which might cause me to returned to my natal family and listen to them. In order to show them that I was able to deal with the difficulties and survive, during the daytime, I was still actively involved in various activities and meetings, and at night I spun wool for other families to earn my food. My livelihood was much harder than before and I had to wear very shabby clothing and the food that I earned was barely enough to feed myself. However, I could freely do whatever I liked and no one stopped me. During the harvest time in 1967, I asked my family to cut the barley from my small plot. As a payment for their help, I agreed to give them all the straw. I myself used this time and crossed the pass and went to one of my uncles who lived in the Shalu area which is located on the other side of the big mountain in our village. I had to spent a day climbing the big mountain and traveled there. I stayed with my uncles' family for 8 days. During that time, I worked on their harvest and they gave me a old chupa and a bag of tsamba that was about 6 jin, plus some salt and the bone of a yak's leg. When I got to the veranda [at home], I saw they had left a pile of my crop beside my family's crop, but they had taken away all my cooking utensils and bedding. My parents asked me, "Why don't you live with us?" I said to them, "I still want to live separately so you should bring all my cooking utensils and bedding to me." During the commune I got the ration grain. Right now, I still help my family and parents a lot because of their loving-kindness. But sometimes I tease my parents that they embarrassed me among the activists during the "three education" because they did not make clothing for me and did not give me enough food. My father said, "You are right. We did that because we are not educated people and we thought you would give up becoming a cadre. Now we know that was our mistake."   

**Q:**  Did your parents have faith in religion, or were they afraid that you would suffer in the future?   

**A:**  They were afraid that after I became a leader, the people would make me suffer.   

**Q:**  When they held the struggle sessions against the previous cadres, did you think that you would also receive such struggle sessions?   

**A:**  I didn't see them holding the struggle sessions against them. I just heard that the cadres suffered a lot when I was in the Jogro math school.   

**Q:**  How did you get the first idea of the revolution [being a revolutionary]?   

**A:**  That was in 1966.   

**Q:**  How did you get the idea?   

**A:**  After I was trained in the math school, when I got the basic idea of revolution, the Three Great Education campaign started, so I became enthusiastic.   

**Q:**  Were you married then?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  At the time of the revolt did you think that the old society was bad and the New Society was good?   

**A:**  Of course, I had that thought because I have seen both the old and the new society.   

**Q:**  Did you have this thought in the beginning in the 1950s?   

**A:**  Yes. Because my grandparents ran away I knew that it was bad, and I had to go down there to replace my parents [on the estate]. I also had fled barefooted and I would tell my parents that they should know that we were happy under the government and they should enjoy it. In the old society, there was no birth control and my mother gave birth to 9 children.   

**Q:**  Did all the children survive?   

**A:**  She gave birth to 10 and 9 are alive. They couldn't kill the children and had to feed them and they had a hard time. Now, some people are saying, "In the past, at the time of our parents, you didn't have anything, but now we have dzo and those things." I am very straightforward and I would tell them, "You shouldn't say that. Because it was the old society and they didn't have the chance to keep them and they didn't have the freedom over their bodies. Now, we can own the fruit of one's hard work and how many animals did you get when the commune was dissolved? You shouldn't think that our parents were incapable and I am capable. Don't you feel pity on your parents?" Now, people have become more greedy and they go to make side income and they don't even think about the government property. I think this is not good, but if I say too much, since I am an old cadre, I feel it is kind of useless. Actually, we are like donkeys which are made to work very hard when they are young and even are beaten to make them go forward, but when the donkey gets old, the better households would feed them with some hay and water if they had it. However, the bad households just throw them away. It is like this. I became the cadre since 1966 and now I am a leader of the xiang. I became the uyön of the Revolutionary Committee and at the time of destroying the chu and setting up the xiang, they invited the leaders of the Women's Association. I have been working all the time in the xiang as the xiang zhang and even became the Party Secretary for a while.   

**Q:**  How did you become the Party Secretary?   

**A:**  When the Senior Party Secretary was transferred to the Düjung chu and the junior became the zhuren of the traders, I became the acting Party Secretary in the xiang. But now I don't get a single fen.   

**A:**  Don't you get the wages from the government?   

**A:**  No, I get nothing. When I told people how hard I worked in the commune, people think that I am being deceitful. At that time, I reduced myself one work point because I had to go to the meetings when the masses were working. There is another woman called Phurkyi [Tib. ཕུར་སྐྱིད] who became the Party Secretary just for three years. The government once gave her 1,000 yuan and then another 1,000 yuan was given later. When the TAR was founded and Chairman Hua came to Tibet, I was the acting Party Secretary of the xiang. At that time, from Panam County, the Party Secretary Lhandzin [Tib. ལྷ་འཛིན] and I went to Lhasa to the meeting. Wang Jiandong who used be the Party Secretary of Panam, and who had been taken around the street wearing a paper hat, was among the leaders of Zhongyang who came with Chairman Hua, but I didn't dare to say anything to him. I told people that Wang Jiandong against whom we shouted, "Destroy them completely," is now among the Zhongyang leaders. We were doing such foolish things then.   

**Q:**  How did you know Dr. Paljor [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར]?   

**A:**  He was in Kharu and I was here. In the year when the Chairman Hua came to Tibet, I was working as the Party Secretary and he was the barefoot doctor of the county. I was fed by the county when I was the Party Secretary and the masses were very poor. Wherever you went, all the people would ask for food. Then I said that I couldn't do the Party Secretary because wherever I went, people asked for food, so as a woman, I couldn’t take the responsibly of food. Then I got married to him and then Tsering Zhuren came and scolded me saying, "How hard it is to grow a single shoot? How long has the government raised you in Panam County, so why did you get married now? The work of the Party Secretary is more important. It is too early to get married."   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was 26 years old. Then he asked me whether I was pregnant and if not, he told me to get divorced. But I kept silent. Before that, they tried to pull me up, but then there was a Party Secretary of the xiang Ngodrub who said that he was going to be the Party Secretary and I was stopped. Later, they tried to pull me up, but the same person stopped me, so I lost my enthusiasm and I stayed like this and left the position.   

**Q:**  What do you mean stopped you?   

**A:**  They stopped me from becoming a cadre.   

**Q:**  Why did they stop you?   

**A:**  Because he himself wanted to become the Party Secretary. So I was made to become the acting Party Secretary in the xiang and the people had a serious food shortage.   

**Q:**  Why did they have the food shortage?   

**A:**  People were working on the commune and tried to get the work points but didn't work hard. The women worked hard but the men were saying that they were going to do outside work and they stayed 4 days for work that should have been done in 2 days. So the farming got delayed and yield was low. So the masses had food shortage and the government duty [taxes] were heavy then.   

**Q:**  How much did you have to pay to the government?   

**A:**  I don't remember the exact number, but we had to pay a lot to the government as our duty. The donation grain was collected according the land, but if the amount of selling grain of the two rukhag was not the same, people would come to beat us up saying "Why did you make us sell so much and not make the rukhag pay that much?" At that time we didn't have any chance to make side incomes, so people had food shortages. Now we can go to make income even if the yield is not that good. People who abide by the law can work and make the income and the people who don't abide by the law can steal and bring something back. So there is no food shortage and some people don't obey to the leaders. During the rukhag people obeyed the leaders because they had to get the work points and if the leaders didn't make the note [of their work], they didn't have anything to do. Now, even if they don't obey the leaders, they can make the income and bring back rice and flour. [laughter]   

**Q:**  During the commune did people die from starvation?   

**A:**  Not really died from starvation, but people's faces got swollen and those things.   

**A:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  It was because they didn't have much food and had to work hard, so their faces got swollen. At that time, the state gave people a little bit of white beans to people whose faces got swollen.   

**Q:**  Did it help?   

**A:**  I heard that it helped when it was made as a soup. I gave it to the people, but haven't eaten it.   

**Q:**  What year was that when the Revolutionary Committee was set up?   

**A:**  This was in 1969-70.   

**Q:**  What kind of uyön did you become there?   

**A:**  I became the uyön of the Revolutionary Committee.   

**Q:**  What was your duty then?   

**A:**  I was the zhuren of the Women's Association and I also mediated wherever there was fighting. I was called wherever there was a fight. When a household had a fight, I had to go and divide up the things. If there was theft and robbery, I had to settle who was right and who was wrong. The main duty was animal husbandry and farming.   

**Q:**  When you first start doing the women's work, what did you do?   

**A:**  The main point was the mental political education.   

**Q:**  Did you do this by calling the women?   

**A:**  Yes, we called them and we would go to the villages to publicize and pass down the documents from Zhongyang, and also pass down the work line on production like plowing, fertilizing and selecting good seeds, which was the main duty of the women.   

**Q:**  Why did the women have the duty to select seeds?   

**A:**  The women usually selected the seeds because the men wouldn't know much about the grain.   

**Q:**  Was this because the house wives stayed home and made food?   

**A:**  It was kind of a conservative system that the women stayed home and the men went out. Then and even now, the family became rich because of the women, because they arranged the livelihood economically. When there were good women in the family, the children were advised well and became good. If there wasn't a good women at home, the livelihood would be poor and the discipline and children would become bad and uneducated, and [the children would] become rascals and the family would decline. So I would tell the women that the women are critical for the unity of the family and for the education of the children.   

**A:**  What kind of changes were there later on regarding the women's work?   

**A:**  There wasn’t much change about works. And at the time of the Chairman Mao, women were highly regarded saying that women lift half of the sky. Nowadays, there is a correct policy on women, but generally speaking the leaders of the different levels don't regard women highly.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Who knows! In the past, from above they would set a percentage of women when they appoint cadres, but now the women are not regarded highly. So the youngsters would say, "At the time of the grandfather, Ame [Tib. ཨ་མེས] [which refers to Chairman Mao], these women were sassy, but when there was no more Ame, these corpses [Tib. རོ] don't have anything to do." [laughter] This was because Chairman Mao said that the women lift half of the sky and we would also say that even though Ame was no more, his policy was still there. Then they would say, "You are really sassy! [Tib. ཁ་དཀྱིལ་ཡོད]."   

**Q:**  Do you know Chinese?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  When did birth control start?   

**A:**  I don't remember the year. It has been a long time since it was done. Probably, it has been ten years since it started. In the beginning, the farmers weren't allowed to have more than three children and other Tibetans weren't allowed to have more than two. Some even had abortions when they exceeded the number. After that, the policy was loosened for awhile and people who could feed the children just gave birth as they wished. It has been about five years since birth control was done.   

**Q:**  What is the main policy regarding doing that?   

**A:**  We would tell the women that our country had large land but a big population, so if we do the birth control, the population would decrease.   

**Q:**  What is the limit for birth control now?   

**A:**  The rich families can have 4 children and the next can have three, and the next two, and cadres can have only one. But most of the families use birth control after having three children. In this area, there are just some families sending their children to school, and most send their children to tend sheep and cows. So I would tell them that you should make one or two children graduate from the school. If you do that, even if the other members would become poor, the one or two who graduate can take the main responsibly for the livelihood. Now people are saying that the reason why people became poor is because the people who have back door relations could go up [get jobs or accepted in school] so how can we go up without the back door. Actually, there are no back door relations. One of my children is in the Teacher's School [Ch. shi xiao] and is studying well and we didn't have any back door relations. I was a holding a kind of conservative thought and told my child to give some butter or meat to the teacher and the prefect. This will become a base for going up. But he said, "Don't talk rubbish. It is useless to do that. Just eat the butter and meat. If I study hard, I can stand on my feet." He is probably studying well and one of the teachers told me that he got second place in the exam. I only kept my older daughter at home and sent all the other children to school.   

**Q:**  How many children do you have?   

**A:**  I have four children and I have the enthusiasm to send three to school. I have land only for two people. I used to have the land for three people, but the land for one person was damaged by the flood as was the case with many people. I would tell my son, "You should study hard and try to become even a dog and pig herder ,and make your living and stand on your own two feet. Otherwise, I won't keep you at home."   

**Q:**  You said that in your village, people do birth control after having three children. Why do people do that?   

**A:**  It is because they know the meaning of birth control. At that time, if I didn't control some body and the leave some body, people would criticize me. The first mobilization of the birth control [refers to sterilization] was done in the house called Labrang Sarpa [Tib. བླ་བྲང་གསར་པ]. A woman who was kind of insane came to the meeting and I told her to wait there until the other people would come. Then the other women came and they shouted to me saying, "Why did you do the birth control for some people and leave some people." Then the insane woman became really mad and even though all the people grabbed her, they couldn't cope with her. Then I explained to them and gave them sugar and water, put the cushions [out] for them and finally they could accept this and did birth control. Then I also told the people to bring eggs and I gave them some eggs. I gave each person 5 eggs and told them to get their health recovered. I also told their family members to take care of them and not let them to work. If they would not recover their health, it would be a insult to the society. However, now we don't need to tell them to do the birth control. In the beginning, when I went to each person to tell them to do the birth control, they would say yes, but on the next day they would send their child to deliver a message saying the mother refused to do that. Now, when I tell them not to give birth like pigs, they will say yes. There are two households who haven't done the birth control. Birth control work went well and in the first year the xiang Party Secretary Thöndrup gave 360 yuan to be paid for the abortion surgery and each woman had to pay 12 yuan. At that time, Sogang, Geding and the Mönkhar were the best at birth control. In Lhunrab, they just went through the motions of mobilizing, but didn't do much. Last time, when they selected the "Good people and the good deeds [Tib. མི་བཟང་ལས་བཟང]," our Women's Association was not selected as the good person and good deeds on birth control. So I said that "Our Women's Association should have been selected as the good person and good deeds. If you selected our association as the good person and good deeds, I would have reported that Party Secretary Thöndrup gave 360 yuan as the donation. But the xiang didn't regard us highly and our wage was like giving a treat to children. I have been working for a long time. So do not make us work like grabbing meat from the bone [Tib. རུས་འབྲད་རྒྱག]. Please just leave us old people [from work] and select the ones who are saying that they want to work for the women."   

**Q:**  How much wages did they pay you per month?   

**A:**  Not per month. One year. I was paid like 20 yuan, and last year they paid me 60 yuan, and this year they paid me 60 yuan. I think if they would drive us out [lose their position], I will work like the masses and won't do any illegal things. So what is there to be scared of?   

**Q:**  What did you think about the changes between the commune system and the present. Do you think it was a good change or what? Do you think the gentsang was correct?   

**A:**  Of course that was correct. People like us didn't have anything when the commune was set up and I got the farming tools and everything. When the commune was dispersed, everything was made even and distributed to the people. Some people who didn't become rich was because they were incapable. For example, when the commune was dissolved, each person was given the same amount of sheep, but now some have 100 sheep and some don't have a single sheep.   

**Q:**  During the commune, people were poor but when some people became rich and some became poor, isn't it like the old society?   

**A:**  Since it depended on their capability, what other methods would people have. [laughter]   

**Q:**  In the old society, there were rich people and also poor people and now we also have the same, right?   

**A:**  The capable ones have become very rich and the poor like Chogkyi [Tib. མཆོག་སྐྱིད], have to be fed by the state. So I think this depend on their capability [means it is not due to one's class]. Doesn't it?   

**Q:**  As for the system, the systems in the early times and the system at present, in some ways it has became kind of the same. In the past, people had private land and now the land was also given to private households. During the commune, all the land belong to the government and all you people ate the same bread. But it is not like this. So what do you think about this difference?   

**A:**  The difference depends on whether you are capable of doing trade or not. In the past, we couldn't trade, but now you can trade as much as you can. It is your advantage if you can eat the things that belonged to whoever, and if you couldn't, you should have misfortune.   

**Q:**  Now some became rich and some became poor like Chogkyi. So if the rich get more and more rich and the poor get more and poor, what do you think will happen in the future?   

**Q:**  Chogkyi was guaranteed by the state a place in the Old People's Home and a group of people receive relief from the state. Some were also moved to Gurungdong and were fed there.   

**Q:**  Was it three or four households?   

**A:**  It was four household and one household went there voluntarily. But other poor people didn't want to go there even though we told them to go.   

**A:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because the place called Gurungdong was a poor place and they would have the label of "poor." In this society, even if they were poor, they would pretend to be not poor and pretend to have things even if they didn't. It is strange. And even if they had things, they would say that they didn't. Some people who were given relief, would also say that they didn't get that.   

**A:**  In terms of people's way of thinking, which is better, the old society or the new society?   

**A:**  Now people have a good livelihood, but it is very hard to find people helping each other.   

