# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0111.01   
##  : with Zhang Ning   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** March 2001  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Annonymous  
**Name:** Zhang Ning  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 56  
**Date of Birth:** 1945  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Zhang Ning was a student at Qinghua University when he a few fellow students decided in 1966 to go to Tibet make revolution. He was part of the first student group to go to Tibet and talks about their trip to Lhasa from Xining and Germu. In Lhasa he joined the Bargor Municipal Cable Broadcasting Station (later called the Lhasa Red Rebel Broadcasting Station) and was the Chinese anchor. He discusses the Cultural Revolution, including the fighting at the broadcast station in February 1967.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0111_01/H_0111_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  (I am) 56 years old. I am as old as Da Ci (Tashi).   

**Q:**  You were in the same class as Tashi?   

**A:**  Yes, the same class.   

**Q:**  Oh, classmates? Qinghua (university)? I talked to him on the phone (when I was) in Lhasa, telling him I had a guest. Also, my father went to the hospital. I didn't have time to...   

**A:**  Luo Ci of the Geology College also. We were of the same school year-second year. The information I can provide is not much. It's totally because of the relationships with Tashi. (We were) classmates and went there when he called us. We did not have a clear motive as to what we would do there. People who went there later, like Tan Feng, were a larger group and had a purpose before they went there. And they had much energy even when they were at school. We were not much sophisticated at that time. They did not contact us much. They would consult Ah Chi whatever they would do. Da Ci and I didn't quite participate in their activities.   

**Q:**  Teacher Zhang, could you tell me how you went to Tibet? I heard that something happened to you at Dong Ge Xin ?   

**A:**  In Xining, no, in Germu, (we were) delayed for a week. That's in 1966. Shortly after the movement began, Tashi went back (to Tibet). He said that (the movement) in interior areas was developing rapidly but not so in Tibet. Sounds like he also wanted it to move faster in Tibet. He called from Tibet. There were four of us in my class. Several others also wanted to go. By the time we were leaving, there were only three of us who left. Another boy was with a pair of twins from the Science and Technology University. They were in the same grade. Their family name is also Zhang. There were four of us, including a girl. Two boys in my class, one boy from the Science and Technology University, plus the girl. On October 18 (I: 1966?) we left Beijing. (We first arrived in) Xining, then Germu. We borrowed some clothes in Xining. Both the provincial party committee and government were very supportive of us. In Xining, the Qinghai, people saw a lot of students doing chuan lian (traveling to establish revolutionary ties) and the government had an organization dealing with this. We borrowed some cotton-padded overcoats and hit the road in the evening. When we arrived at Germu, we couldn't enter Tibet because the office in Germu was under the administration of Tibet. At that time, there was no (Red Guard) movement in Tibet. No one had visited them yet. In Germu, we could not go there through a normal channel. And there was nothing about providing living expenses for us, so we stayed in a hotel. There we ran into three middle-school girls from Beijing.   

**Q:**  Were they from 88th Middle School?   

**A:**  No, from the 33rd Middle School. They had been there for many days. They were there even earlier than we were. We ran into them in the washroom in the evening. I said, "you speak like Beijingers, are you from Beijing?" "Yes, from Beijing." They were in army uniforms and had been to many places to do chuan lian (establish revolutionary ties) and wanted to go to Tibet. They were sixteen years old in the first or second grade in middle school. Two of them were very short and skinny. And so we got to know each other. They said, "you are from Qinghua and are also going to Tibet? Let's go with you." On the second day, we went to the transportation regiment of the army stationed in Germu. We talked to them, telling them we were chuan lian so we were easily understood by them. They had about 20 Liberation brand trucks that were going to Tibet the next day. They said, "You come early next morning." Each of us sat in the driver's cab. Sight seeing...   

**Q:**  Any reaction to the altitude at the Tanggula Pass?   

**A:**  When we crossed the Wu Dao Liang, they had a reaction. I just had a slight headache. Nothing serious. In Lhasa we even did a bit of jogging in the morning. Four of us, plus the three middle-school girls, left Beijing on October 18 and arrived (at Lhasa) in early November (1966). It took a week to drive from Germu to Lhasa. We stayed in Germu for a week. We got off (in Lhasa) in the evening, made phone calls and then we went to the No. 2 Reception House. When we were there at that time, together with us were several Tibetan classmates, including three medical students. Then we stayed there for a total of six months. From November to ... ... April ... June of the next year. Spring. (We stayed there until) after the crackdown on the rebellion in February. I could not remember clearly when the second batch of people arrived there. One of them was a boy in my class named Zhang Yonggui. He was from Hebei. It was the second time they went to Tibet. It was the first time for us. I went there just that time. I didn't go there a second time. At that time, the movement was at the stage of fanning the wind to spread the fire. Various government organizations, including the public security bureaus, procuratorate, courts, film studio, radio station, and printing press, Major Repair Plant ... There were many Han Chinese directors at the work units. The movement was still at the stage of fanning the wind to spread up the fire. Then... I joined a broadcasting station called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The name of a xiang and county in Nyemo that played an important role in the nun Trinley Chödrön&#x27;s uprising of 1968-69.">Bargor</a> Municipal Cable Broadcasting Station.   

**Q:**  At what location?   

**A:**  On the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The name of a xiang and county in Nyemo that played an important role in the nun Trinley Chödrön&#x27;s uprising of 1968-69.">Bargor</a> street. In a small courtyard on the Bargor Street. It had been there for many years. Gersang Lhamo, a female student of medicine, was the anchor person. I was the Chinese anchor. At six o'clock every morning we broadcast the "East is red." It was later named Lhasa Red Rebel Broadcasting Station.   

**Q:**  Did you broadcast? Who wrote the scripts?   

**A:**  There were three people at the station then.   

**Q:**  Were there any reporters?   

**A:**  I only knew two men working there. One of them was from Shaanxi, named Yu Yihe. The other was from Beijing, named Wen Yuan. Wen Yuan is still alive. I contacted him last year and a year ago. He went to Tibet in 1958 to aid Tibet and was among the first broadcasters after the radio station was set up. He was, like people who went there in the 1950s and 1960s, totally a Tibetan, in terms of both language and life style. They oftentimes went down to do interviews. He was there till February-the reverse current in February, the suppression of the rebellion-the whole situation changed. After it changed, we spent day in and day out there. Then the second batch of people arrived.   

**Q:**  Were you used to the life when you first got there?   

**A:**  Not quite. It's the first time I had left home, lived in a hotel and ate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> and buttered tea. It was ok.   

**Q:**  Were you able to get in touch with Beijing by phone? Was it difficult?   

**A:**  I made phone calls later. I did not contact them at the early stage. At that time, many students from the interior (neidi) lived at that reception house. They had come from all over the country. Some of them were there purely to do chuanlian and would leave after two or three days. They came there via the Qinghai-Tibet highway and left via the Sichuan-Tibet highway. They went to Shannan and somewhere else to have some fun and then left. As to the second batch of people, I don't know who contacted them and how they came here. Among the eight colleges they came from were Qinghua, Beijing Aerospace College ... (Students were) mostly (from) Qinghua.   

**Q:**  Anyone from the Nationalities College?   

**A:**  Right, the Nationalities College.   

**Q:**  Were they all Tibetans?   

**A:**  There were a lot of Tibetans from the Nationalities College. There were two or three people from the Beijing Aerospace College. They had great energy as did those from Qinghua.   

**Q:**  I know that Nie Chong from the Beijing Aerospace College was very famous. At that time there was a saying in Tibet... Do you know Teacher Tao and Tashi? They looked for (Nie) and didn't find him. I am wondering if he's [she's] still alive.   

**A:**  I don't know. I have never contacted him. Not in Lhasa, not after I came back to Beijing. At the end of 1966, Wang Qimei and Zhang Guohua gave the (revoltionary) rebels some speeches, welcoming people to do (revolutionary) revolt and give advice to the Party Committee. In December or January, roughly during that period ... We did something in earnest when we first went there. The rebels in Lhasa considered that Wang Qimei was not good and was a traitor. Zhang Guohua was trying to protect him. Zhang Guohua came to see us once. Very late one night. Late 1966 or early 1967. I am not every clear. Zhang Guohua had a very good attitude, was very friendly, but was not in good heath. He was of such an age and was carrying oxygen with him. Many of them were wearing military uniforms and carrying oxygen. We felt that he was under much pressure ... for the sake of Wang Qimei. We did not do much later. It's just chuan lian, and going to various work units. Every work unit asked us to talk about what's going on in Beijing. We stayed a few days in the Major Repair Plant in the north suburb, talking with the rebels about what's going on in Beijing. All the rebels in the work units in Tibet had a small organization-Rebel Headquarters. The (students from) colleges in Beijing had a larger scale. Then two factions appeared.   

**Q:**  What caused the two factions to come into existence?   

**A:**  The fact was that after one faction came into existence and became active, another faction appeared. You guys are revolutionaries, then how about us, are we not revolutionaries? There was not really any factional fight then; it was still at the stage of mobilization. The broadcasting station equipped us with a vehicle, a broadcasting vehicle.   

**Q:**  You had a broadcasting vehicle?   

**A:**  Yes. (It was equipped with) a record player, with four amplifiers. We pre-recorded the tape and broadcast it on the road. We took an electric generator with us. The second batch of people included some from the 80th Middle School of Beijing. There were more than a dozen of them. They lived at the No. 2 Reception House after they arrived. They mostly were ... kids but were very energetic and active, following the people from Qinghua, following Nie Chong. We were soon finished.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because those people often contacted each other. After we left Beijing, a number of people from various departments (of Qinghua) was called together and were prepared to go to Tibet. Several of them were from the department of Kuai Dafu. There were also some old men from our department-several years older than we were. A lot of people came. We were left behind and did not know what to do. The girl in my class, from Guangdong, went to Linzi with them to do social research. They listened to Mao Zedong and did social research. If the broadcast station wanted us, we would go there. From the viewpoint of engaging in the movement, we did not have the intelligence and could not keep in pace with the trends...   

**Q:**  But you were still at the Rebel Headquarters?   

**A:**  We were all friends. As to the relationships with the people from the Nationalities College, I am not quite clear. We did not get along very well. We always felt that we had different ideas. But Nie Chong was there mainly to dig out a dark line ... there were several dozen traitors in the central government ... they went there with a task and purpose. They went to the military command and tried to break into it. The issue of breaking into the military command...   

**Q:**  Were you there at that time? Did you see it?   

**A:**  I had been staying in the No. 2 Reception House. I didn't go there at all. Later, the people became strangers to us and we did not get along. After the breaking into the military command (happened), the chuan lian was asked to stop. We set up Liao Yuan (Prairie Fire). Later, chuan lian was stopped and people were asked to go back to Beijing. Then Liao Yuan contacted the Central Committee of Cultural Revolution. I called the Central Committee of Cultural Revolution when I was in Lhasa and got through. It was the office of Jiang Qing. I said we were in Tibet. They asked us to report our situation to them and (asked) if we had any requirements. Later, our work unit ... probably through the telegraph office ... sent the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution a telegraph telling them our requirements. The Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution later sent back a telegraph, a reply to Liao Yuan. It had only one line, about a dozen words, saying the stoppage of chuan lian is indeed the arrangement of the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution [but you can stay] .... Such a simple telegraph. Of course, chuan lian had already been stopped in January or February. A telegraph from the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution! It was a big thing for the Rebel Headquarters. Probably it's the only time during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet that it received a telegraph directly from the Central Committee. I'm not sure (if that's true.) For the two factions in Tibet, it's a thing that they could make much out of. The broadcasting vehicles were out on the streets (telling people) there was a telegraph from the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution. They were making use of us as an instrument of publicity.   

**Q:**  Teacher Zhang, how many people did Liao Yuan have at that time?   

**A:** There were about three or four Han Chinese. As to Tibetans, there was nobody but the few of us, including the Geology College and not the Nationalities College. A total of maybe 18. The Nationalities College later was associated with the Tibetan faction of Da Lian Zhi (the Great Alliance). I am not clear. Anyway, I could not communicate with them about their viewpoints and was not involved with them at all. After I came back to Beijing, I went to the Nationalities College to look for them. I have a good impression of those people. They were very honest. I feel that the Tibetan students were earnest and honest. As to Nie Chong, I couldn't ... I could not remember exactly in which month I came back. My impression is that I didn't leave until April.  

**Q:** April 1967?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** Did you come back via Sichuan-Tibetan highway?  

**A:** I still took the Qinghai-Tibetan highway. At that time, all left. Four vehicles, two going east, two west. Not just students from Beijing, but also (students from) Shanghai and other places. There were many students in Tibet then. The Tibetan girl in my class took the Sichuan-Tibet highway. After I came back in spring, they went to Tibet again in summer. We didn't. We had a liaison station in the school. It was called the Tibet Liaison Station in 1967 and 1968. It was in a classroom in Qinghua. It did nothing but answer phone calls. People coming back from the Sichuan-Tibetan highway brought back some materials and (we) sent materials such as bulletins published in Qinghua to Tibet. We had a secretary in Beijing. There were about three students in Beijing. Me, another boy from Qinghua and a girl from the 80th Middle School. I was at the broadcast station when the army was involved in the crackdown on the rebellion in (Tibet in) February. In the first few days, the situation got tense, the army surrounded (the broadcast station) and the main entrance was blocked. Many desks, tables, and chairs were used to block the door. They couldn't get in. It was only a small courtyard. Anyway, the residents nearby sent us <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> at night. We stayed there for half a month without going outside. We had food to eat.  

**Q:** Did you still broadcast?  

**A:** We had been broadcasting all the time. I don't remember the details. My deepest memory is that the soldiers came in from the roof. Submachine guns were put up on the high-rises nearby. Then the army... came to arrest us that day. Of course, they wouldn't touch students from Beijing. But they would take away the staff workers at the broadcasting station. There were apparently two factions in the broadcasting station. Tibetans of another faction had stopped coming to work long ago. (Soldiers) came in with bayonets in their hands. Wen Yuan was a worker at the Lhasa Rebel Headquarters. They came mainly for him. He was in the innermost room. We could not stop (the soldiers), and with their bayonets in the front, they squeezed into (the room) and took him away with his hands tied. They took Yu Yihe and Wen Yuan, the two of them.  

**Q:** Why did they arrest them?  

**A:** A lot of people from the Rebel Headquarters were arrested. A young man at the Major Repair Plant, I can't remember his name... Also Gu Da Bao (Note: it might be a person's name.) ... two people from the film studio... also someone called Zhao of the court... I cann't remember his name. I have a very good impression of the person. He was from Shaanxi, a veteran from Shaanxi. Those people went to Tibet with the army shortly after the liberation. Quite a few were arrested. And students from Beijing were kicked out as soon as possible. I am totally unclear on what happened later. After graduation and being assigned to work, we received those who were sent to work (outside Beijing). I was assigned to Aba in Sichuan after graduating from Qinghua.  

**Q:** Oh, have you ever stayed in Aba?  

**A:** At that time, the Worker's Propaganda Team decided life and death. Everything was decided by the Worker's Propaganda Team. Later we learned that party members and cadres in my class who were on good terms with (the Worker's Propaganda Team) stayed in Beijing. At that time I proposed to the WPT that I would like to go to Tibet. The final response was that there was no quota (left) for Tibet so we will send you somewhere where there were Tibetans. I stayed in Aba for four years.  

**Q:** Which county were you in there?  

**A:** The first county after you went there. Wen chuan.  

**Q:** Yes, Wen Chuan was the most important county over there.  

**A:** Yes, it had the best conditions. Have you also been there?  

**Q:** Yes, yes, I have been there. My brother was out there; his name is Xu Ping.  

**A:** Xu Ping? I read a report saying that Aba produced a doctor. Was he of the Qiang Nationality?  

**Q:** Yes, the Qiang Nationality.  

**A:** I was there, in a Qiang mountain village. Is he in Beijing?  

**Q:** Yes, yes. We are in the same department.  

**A:** I'd like to see him sometime. Two Qinghua students were assigned there. More than a dozen Beijing University students were assigned there. People were sent down to the countryside or factories, with most going down to the countryside. As to going to the countryside, Beijing University students were liberal arts majors. "You all go to the countryside. You two from Qinghua are in engineering so stay in the factories." So the two students of Qinghua stayed in Wen Chuan. Beijing University students went to Qing Chuan Mao and like. I received many people transferred to other places when I was there.  

**Q:** All from Tibet?  

**A:** Many were from the Tibetan military command. I felt that they were looking for my classmates all over the country, one by one.  

**Q:** What were they after?  

**A:** About what happened in February, about the breaking into of the military command, the 5.16 movement. Purifying the class rank. The life of Ah Ci is because of this issue. I haven't talked to him. I think that he has had a hard time over the past few decades in Tibet.  

**Q:** He mentioned this to me. We chatted for about half a day. I was high when I was calling you that day. I was chatting with him and said, "I will record it on tape." He said, "don't record it. I'll tell you and you can take mental notes."  

**A:** I forgot what I was doing in Beijing. I was just a messenger. Tibet told me to look around. I met him once. I totally forgot what it was about. I don't recall what it was about. I didn't care about it. About someone's historical problems. Da Wa (Dawa) and Tashi know it.  

**Q:** Teacher Zhang, do you know anyone in Beijing who went there at that time, in the second batch of people? People you keep in touch with? I want to visit them.  

**A:** Do you know anyone else?  

**Q:** Only two. He didn't give me (the names of) others yet. He mentioned Hu Xingyu. This person is overseas or somewhere now. I checked his number and the embassy said there was no such number.  

**A:** I'll look for Da Rizhong's number for you. Da Rizhong was a small leader. He lives not far from here, just outside Chaoyang Gate. He was at the 80th Middle School. The kid is pretty smart and had principles. There was a Shen Youguang at the Textile Institute. They were the second batch, from the Industrial Chemistry Department of Qinghua.  

**Q:** What's the name of a person of the 80th Middle School?  

**A:** I was familiar with him. I'll think about it. I haven't contacted (those people) for a decade.  

**Q:** Was there anyone receiving you when you went to Lhasa? What did you do about housing and eating? So many people...  

**A:** At the end of 1966 when the movement just began, the No. 2 Reception House of Lhasa... You pay if you eat.  

**Q:** What if you didn't have money?  

**A:** Families would remit money (to us.) We didn't have money for train tickets. At that time, you were free to ride the train when you started in Beijing. In Xining, we went to the provincial government and got some tickets and borrowed clothes. But for food, the families had to remit money to Lhasa. Together with food coupons.  

**Q:** Teacher Zhang, were you salaried when you were working at the broadcasting station?  

**A:** No. (We were) students. Just helpers there. We all spent our parents' money. We, as the first batch going there, were somewhat special. We were there to work, not to chuan lian. In the beginning of 1966, we said, "we couldn't go on staying in a revisionist school. Let's quit the school and go to Tibet to work for the revolution." Four of us went there with our entire luggage, which was very heavy. People going there to do chuan lian carried just a small bag. We went there that way. For this issue we went to the State Council. We demanded that we go to Tibet. Probably someone under the Premier's Office give us a reply. "Ask them to approve." In the early stage of the movement, in July and August of 1966, (students) would go to the central government leaders, not people below. The Premier's Office postponed for several days. So we went there every day waiting for a reply. At that time it was nothing (to do that).  

**Q:** Teacher Zhang, you know that Kuai Dafu of Qinghua was very famous at that time. Did he have anything to do with the Rebel Headquarters?  

**A:** Schools in the interior area, including the four student leaders in Beijing, had no time to care about Tibet. Kuai Daifu had too much to care about at that time. He was busy with national issues, like Liu Shaoqi.  

**Q:** Teacher Zhang, you have never been back to Tibet again?  

**A:** No, never again.  

**Q:** How about going there sometime in summer? When you were young...  

**A:** I very much want to go there.  

**Q:** Have you taken any picture at that time?  

**A:** I have one taken on the rooftop of the No. 2 Reception House. A black and white photo. (We were) in cotton padded coats. Just a few of us at Liao Yuan. We were not active in the movement. You see, we quit the school and went to work for the revolution in Tibet, not to dig out whatever black lines were there. Not that. We were very innocent.  

**Q:** Teacher Zhang, I know that your major was engineering, how come you became a lawyer?  

**A:** I am in technology management. Invention, patents. Patents are all about technology. Later I was involved in lawsuits about technology and patents. Very rare. There is not another lawyer from Qinghua in Beijing.  

**Q:** Teacher Zhang, you all came back then. Was that because the central government issued a command asking all of you to go back or...?  

**A:** Yes. About January 1967, the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution issued a directive nationwide saying that chuan lian couldn't go on like that.  

**Q:** Did that happen when Fu Ke revolutionized?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** So, you all left.  

**A:** No, we didn't leave (Tibet) at that time. None in Tibet left, because after the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution agreed in its formal reply that we could stay, it appeared that none of them left. And there were people coming from time to time. As to what happened after February 1967, I felt like I hadn't been there, that I hadn't been on the front line. I wasn't clear.  

**Q:** When you came back to Beijing, approximately how many people were with you?  

**A:** About 20 or 30 in each vehicle.  

**Q:** Were they all from Beijing or all over the country?  

**A:** I didn't know many of them.  

**Q:** So you could stay (if you wanted to)?  

**A:** It did not work when we left, because the rebels in Lhasa had all been caught and leaders in all the work units had been arrested. What was left was Da Lian Zhi (the Great Alliance Command) spitting and scolding every day at the hotel. So I couldn't stay. We still had two pictures taken at the No. 2 Reception House. (The photos are) of big meetings. Citizens in Lhasa, who would come whenever they were called upon, holding a red book in their hand and shouting slogans. They knew nothing. ... Then (people) began to criticize the rebels [faction].  

**Q:** In the beginning, did Zhang Guohua and Wang Qimei support the Rebellion Headquarters or...?  

**A:** In the beginning of the movement, rebels targeted them and made trouble for them every day. They had to cope with them every day, at the military command or the regional party committee. We also went to the regional party committee, (accomplishing nothing but) seeing the secretary. Wang Qimei was in very poor health. I still remember when he died of lung disease.  

**Q:** Teacher Zhang, have you been somewhere else?  

**A:** The girl in my class, the one from Guangdong, made a trip to east Tibet, -- to the Linzi Farm. Tashi made a trip to Yadong. I regretted (not having been to more places.)...  

**Q:**  When I was little, my father worked with the Department of Industry. You know Tuchun Nima. He belonged to that system. My mother was at the Cement Plant.   

**A:**  I have been to the Cement Plant.   

**Q:**  I remember that when I was little, there were many people coming from the Nationalities College, though I was not clear if they were there as chuan lian. My mother told me, "look at the college students, you must study hard."   

**A:**  At that time, we were organized every day to visit Shannan. Many people from the interior either went to Shannan or visited the Potala Palace. We stubbornly resisted the revisionist practices of the regional party committee. I have never been there.   

**Q:**  Teacher Zhang, you don't have high blood pressure, do you?   

**A:**  No problem with that. I had no problem with going to Tibet.   

**Q:**  There are airplanes now.   

**A:**  ...I travel a lot to the southwest...   

