# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0017.01   
##  : with Jimpa Legtsog [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་ལེགས་ཚོགས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**ï¿½2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region/China  
**Date of Interview:** 19 June 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jimpa Legtsog [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་ལེགས་ཚོགས]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 53  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jimpa Legtsog was a monk from Drepung monastey. In this interview he discusses how he joined the monastery and his initial decisions when entering the monastery. He also discusses being in the monastery during the artillery shelling of Norbulinga in 1959 and what happened at Drepung after the 1959 uprising and during the Cultural Revolution. Details are also presented on the re-admission of monks to the monastery after 1980, procedures for re-admittance, and details of livelihood in the monastery after 1980. [Note: some of Trindor la's comments were not in the tape, but were included during the initial translation]   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0017_01/M_0017_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When did you first become a monk?   

**A:**  I was about 10.   

**Q:**  Where are you from?   

**A:**  I am from Tülung Dechen [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་བདེ་ཆེན] County's Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར] Xiang.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am now 53.   

**Q:**  You became a monk around 1956, right? Which tratsang (college) were you in?   

**A:**  I am from Loseling and Tsethang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Were all the monks in Tsetang Khamtsen pöba (from Central Tibet)?   

**A:**  Yes. it was entirely pöba. There were no Amdo and no Khambas. In general, the Lhoka Tsethang area was supposed to belong to Tsethang Khamtsen, but internally, there were different things [Tib. ནང་གསེས་འདྲ་མི་འདྲ].   

**Q:**  Were the monks in Tsethang Khamtsen mostly tragyün (from far distances) or were they newly admitted (Tib. སརཤུག [གསར་ཞུགས])?   

**A:**  We were not tragyün since we were from nearby places (Tib. ཉེཁོར [Tib. ཉེ་འཁོར་བ]). We were not allowed to join some of the khamtsen like Tsha [Tib. ཚ་བ] which was for Amdo, Khamba and Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག].   

**Q:**  In Loseling, what were the other khamtsen where all the monks are pöba?   

**A:**  There were Tsethang, Kongpo [Tib. ཀོང་པོ], Tsangpa [Tib. གཙང་པ], and Gya [Tib. རྒྱ] Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Which pöba were there in Gya Khamtsen?   

**A:**  There were nyekhora in Gya Khamtsen and they were entirely pöba. I heard that in very early times, it used to be entirely Chinese, but later it switched and became all pöba because it [China] was located very far away.   

**Q:**  How about Tsha Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Tsha Khamtsen had various types of monks both khamba and pöba. Some khamtsen had both khamba and pöba. There were also entirely Khamba Khamtsen and entirely pöba khamtsen.   

**Q:**  In Tsethang Khamtsen, if a pöba came and didnt know anyone, was there a rule that the Khamtsen had to find him a gegen (teacher)?   

**A:**  Basically, which ever khamtsen you joined, they would take care of you.   

**Q:**  Would the khamtsen find the gegen?   

**A:**  Yes. Since we were all nyekhora and our parents knew many people, it was easy to find a gegen. When somebody came from a long distance, they would help him to find a gegen.   

**Q:**  In Tsethang Khamtsen, didn't you have a rule like this -- they find the gegen by turns if the new monk didn't know anybody. Did you do that in Tsethang Khamtsen?   

**A:**  In Lhoka there was a monastery called Sungrabling [Tib. གསུང་རབ་གླིང] from which the monks would come to Drepung to study pecha (texts) in Tsethang Khamtsen and they knew some people. These monks also got their shares of gye (alms) and phog (salary) from their branch monastery and they could find a gegen through these connections.   

**Q:**  What did you do when you first become a monk?   

**A:**  In the khamtsen, if you don't become a khamtsen chöndze, then you have to do the shöndre (young monk tax). For example, when you are young, you have to bring tea to the lamas who don't come to the tsog (prayer assembly). When you get older, you have to work for the khamtsen doing tasks like carry things from Lhasa. Then when you became older, you become khamtsen gegen (administrator) and then nyerpa (steward). If you become a khamtsen chöndze, then you don't have to do any of these shöndre. To become a Khamtsen chöndze, you have to serve tea and droma dresi (a dish consisting of sweetened rice, butter and wild sweet potatoes) and give gye (alms) for two prayer assemblies (tsog [Tib. ཙོགས་དུས་གཉིས]). Then after some time, you have to again give gye and serve rice gruel porridge (Tib. thukpa mingtag [thug pa ming btags] for all the monks during two tsog.   

**Q:**  Is there a limit of years for doing shöndre?   

**A:**  There is a limit. Probably it is about 10 years. In our Khamtsen, you do the khamtsen gegen first, then afterward you do nyerpa, and then after a few years you are in the tsondu (assembly).   

**Q:**  Was your gegen a relative?   

**A:**  No. A friend of my family.   

**Q:**  Did you study the prayers recited in the tsog (Tib. དོནཁཏྲེ [འདོན་ཁ་ཁྲལ])?   

**A:**  I studied the prayers recited in the tsog for 3 years. And I studied tsenyi for one year and then the revolt started.   

**Q:**  Were you pechawa or lagyüba (common monk)?   

**A:**  I was admitted as a pechawa just at the time of the revolt.   

**Q:**  In some khamtsen, if you were a pechawa you didnt have to be the khamtsen gegen. What about in Tsethang Khamtsen?   

**A:**  In our khamtsen, even pechawa had to do shöndre and khamtsen gegen.   

**Q:**  When the revolt took place how old were you?   

**A:**  I was 17. I was living in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did the monks think that a revolt was going to happen? Did you think that the monastery will remain as before?   

**A:**  Yes. It was well known that the revolt will take place and some thought they would win the war and some thought they would lose. They were saying different things.   

**Q:**  When the revolt took place, were you in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you first learn of the revolt?   

**A:**  It took place on the March 10th. We could see the artillery shelling and then around evening, we could see riders on horseback fleeing from Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Could you see those from Drepung?   

**A:**  We couldn't see Norbilinga, but we could see people riding horses and going there. On the 2nd day of the revolt, 4 shells were fired, two in front and two behind of the monastery onto empty spots.   

**Q:**  Did most of the monks think to stay or flee?   

**A:**  Except for some younger kids and older monks, most people fled on the day of the revolt. The others fled up to Gembe Utse [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་དབུ་རྩེ] and crossed the mountain pass there. They couldn't go down since there were soldiers in front. Some stayed and some fled.   

**Q:**  Did the laji and the monastic officials (Tib. ལེནེ [ལས་སྣེ]) send you messages telling you to flee or to stay?   

**A:**  At that time, everything was chaotic, and they themselves don't know where to go. Some of them like the sheyngo stayed and some fled.   

**Q:**  What did the monks think at this time?   

**A:**  Some said the Chinese will do different things, some based on facts and some were made up. And the majority fled.   

**Q:**  Didn't you go to Gembe Utse?   

**A:**  I myself crossed the mountian pass and went home and stayed there. I was still wearing monk's robe in the house but my family said, "if the Chinese come they will arrest you, so its better to return to the monastery." So I returned through the same route.   

**Q:**  What was the monastery like when you returned? Had the soldiers come?   

**A:**  When I returned, the Chinese had still not yet arrived. Then the Chinese arrived and told us to bring all the weapons, and all of the weapons were put on the place where the parking lot is now.   

**Q:**  How many days after the revolt, did they do this?   

**A:**  This was probaly a week after the initial revolt. I don't remember well. They said to bring the weapons, so I brought my cleaver. They said this is for cooking, so you can take it back. Then they told all the monks to come to the parking lot. They shut the Loseling monks in Loseling college and shut the monks of Deyang, Gomang and the monks of Ngagpa in Gomang College's assembly hall (Tib. དུཁང [འདུ་ཁང]). Then they differentiated monastic officials and put them in Loseling top floors [Tib. ཐོག་ཁ]. After 2 days, they sent the rest of us into each of our khamtsen and we made tea in the khamtsen together. The others were shut in Loseling.   

**Q:**  I heard that some were shut in the Phodrang [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང] .   

**A:**  The main monastic officials (lene) were shut on Loseling's top floor, and the lower ranking officials like those in charge of the mitsen and khamtsen, were shut in the Ganden Phodrang [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང] building. The Phodrang monks weren't told they were arrested. They were told that they were going for studies in Phodrang. I was young, so they told me to come to study. So I thought that since I was not a chöndze and was not in charge of the khamtsen, I thought it was to study writting and it wiil be good to study. Then when we came to Phodrang, I saw soldiers surrounding the building. So I thought I shouldn't have gone there. The monks who didn't have titles [Tib. གོ་གནས] were left in the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  Then after some time they did another investigation of those in the Phodrang and released some of them.   

**Q:**  They didn't released the ones shut in the Loseling top floor, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. They released them from Phodrang and another group of many people like the Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khambas were sent to build roads in China. Then the officials left on Loseling top floor and Phodrang were sent to Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] House and to Trapchi Prison. From there, they differentiated and some were said to have been sent from there to Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Did they send them right away or after 2-3 months?   

**A:**  I think that this took place after 3-4 months.   

**Q:**  What did you do during these months?   

**Q:**  During the three months, the monks on Loseling's top floor and in the Phodrang might have been doing studying. We in our Khamtsen studied various documents from the Chinese government regarding the revolt and such things.   

**Q:**  Did the monks from all the khamtsen gather together or did they stay in each khamtsen?   

**A:**  We ate separately, but the following five khamtsen: Tsethang, Tsangpa, Gyerong [Tib. rgayl rong], Pithug [Tib. spe thub ?] and Tsha [Tib. ཚ་བ] studied together in Tsha Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Who were the leaders at this time?   

**A:**  The main leader was the Work Team (Tib. ledön rukhag [ལས་དོན་རུ་ཁག]) and the detailed work was done by the Democratic Mangement Committee (Tib. མ [Tib. དམངས་གཙོ་བདག་གཉེར་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]) whose zhuren (head) was Gyurmey Rindzin [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་རིག་འཛིན]. He was from Tsethang Khamtsen. He was the zhuren from 1959-1975 and died in 1975. Under him, there was one zhuren and uyön in charge of road making, planting apple trees, rock splitting, planting vegetable, etc. At this time, some young monks went home and about 200 monks went to learn driving vehicles. Some went to the Post Office [Ch. you dian ju] and to the department store [Ch. gong si] and some are stil here.  

**A:**  Most monks wore monk's robe because in the past we were not allowed go around the monastery without wearing them, so it had been habitual to wear monk's and hard to change it. But later when doing physical work, we started wearing garments and trousers.   

**Q:**  When did the [unit] called Culture (Tib. rigshung [rig gzhung] start?   

**A:**  At first, it was not like nowadays. In the beginning, there were only 4 units in the Democratic Management Committee: Financial (Tib. ནོརསི [ནོར་སྲིད]), Cultural Heritage (Tib. rigne ngöshöl [རིག་གནས་དངོས་ཤུལ]) for overseeing the things in the temples and Security. AT this time, there was only a little bit production (Tib.thönkye [ཐོན་སྐྱེད]).   

**Q:**  How did the monks earn there living at this time? Some say that they had started a kind of communal mess.   

**A:**  At first, they were in their own khamtsen. Then after monks were sent off, there were less monks. For example, 400 were sent to build roads in Kongbo, 200 were sent to learn driving, some were sent to school, and some went home. Therefore, the rest were gatherered together in Loseling where they ate food together.   

**Q:**  How many months after the revolt was this?   

**A:**  We ate like this for 5-6 months together.   

**Q:**  At this time, you used the tsamba left in the khamtsen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At the end of 1959, about how many monks were there in Drepung?   

**A:**  A little less than 2,000.   

**Q:**  So after those monks left, what did these 2,000 monks do since there was no tsog?   

**A:**  Well, then the monks started working in those five units doing planting trees and apple trees and working on building a water mill at Jiri Risur. Then we planted trees and apple trees in front of the monastery. Then at Tülung Yamda [Tib. ཡབ་མདའ] there were big meadows which the monks opened and made into fields and build houses. Then some monks went to Ngachen Trang [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན་འཕྲང] [Power Station] and one group went to Polinga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག] where an athletic field was being made. At this time, only the old old monks were left in the monastery. All the younger monks were sent out to work. Then we did work at the Cement Factory--the monks did all the wall foundation work. The Ngachen Power Station was built by the monks of the three great monastic seats and the Labor Camp Members (Tib. ལེཡྨི་རུཁག [ལས་མི་རུ་ཁག]).   

**Q:**  Were they paid a salary? Or did they get work points in the Ngachen Power Station?   

**A:**  They the work points, but only very little. In one year monk got ¥20 or ¥30 for the year. Monks who werent able to work, had to repay money for the grain rations. When they went to work on construction, they get only ¥1 per day.   

**Q:**  How long did the monks eat together communally at Loseling?   

**A:**  After we ate togethr in Loseling, later Loseling broke up and we were divided into smaller organizations such as one for sewing, contruction brigade, one for carpentry and one for blacksmiths, one for collecting firewood, etc. These stayed separately and made fire (cooked) for themselves. Later, when the monks became less after they left for construction, etc., then it was divided into two organizations: the apple organization (kushü drigdzu [Tib. ཀུ་ཤུའི་སྒྲིག་འཛུགས]) and the Old People's Home (gensokhang [Tib. རྒས་གསོ་ཁང]).One stayed in Loseling and one moved to Pombara [Tib. སྤོམ་པོ་ར].   

**Q:**  Was this before the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  It was at the time when the Cultural Revolution started and when another group of monks were sent to the Lhasa Cement Factory and another group was sent to the Lhasa Flour Factory [Ch. mian fen chang]. Also some were sent to the West Military Supply Depot [Ch. xi jiao da chang]. And there were still some students in Neychung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང]. So roughly during the Cultural Revolution 360 monks were sent out like this, and 360 stayed in the monastery.   

**Q:**  From 1959 to Cultural Revolution, did they hold Mönlam?   

**A:**  Oh, I think there were 2-3 Mönlam. One I went to. At that time, I was young and was staying in the monastery. There was definitely a second. I'm not sure about a third.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, did they hold tsog?   

**A:**  If the monastery got some sponsors, they would hold a small tsog. But there weren't sponsors like nowadays because the individual's [Tib. མི་སོ་སོ] livelihood was hard then.   

**Q:**  How did the monastery get its livelihood from 1959 to Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  The older monks were in the Old People's Home and got the money from the government. The younger monks worked and were living by one's own toil. They bought barley and had it roasted and milled and ate together at Loseling. And some of the small organizations were making their living by planting vegetables and they also ate together.   

**Q:**  Did the government give expenses for Loseling or did they use the things left from the past?   

**A:**  First they used the things left in the monastery like grain, butter, tea until it ran out. Then we bought from the government. At this time we bought tsamba and we were sold one gyama of butter a month and there was no oil. We divided the tsamba among the monks and the butter was kept jointly with tea and used for making tea for all in the morning and there was no butter tea in afternoon and evening. The monks ate their pag separately and drank the tea together.   

**Q:**  How did the monks get the idea to go to Ngachen Phang? Did the Work Team say that they need 20 people to work?   

**A:**  The contruction units contacted the Work Team and said they need some more workers and the Work Team asked if there were volunteers, and if there were volunteers, they send them. If they didn't have volunteers, then they picked others to go to work.   

**Q:**  Did the Work Team stay continuously?   

**A:**  Two or three members stayed continuously in the monastery until the start of the Cultural Revolutionolution.   

**Q:**  How did the Cultural Revolution start in the monastery?   

**A:**  At first, the two groups; gyenlo and nyamdre arose and they fought. Then after this, they destroyed the old thoughts and old cultures [Tib. བསམ་བློ་རྙིང་པ་དང་རིག་གནས་རྙིང་པ]. At this time, all the old things began to be destroyed in the monastery and the apartments and they also destroyed all the small monasteries.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there two groups in the monastery?   

**A:**  No, the government said that the monks werent allowed to join these two groups. During this time they abused the monks a lot. They said, "the statues are the dead monsters and demons and the monks are the living monsters and demons" [Tib. lha de lha 'dre gdon bgegs shi ro red/ dgrwa pa lha 'dre gdon bgegs gson po red ] like this we were not regarded as humans.   

**Q:**  Did the monks destroy the things in the monastery or did the people from outside do it?   

**A:**  The order came from the Financial Office [Ch. cai jin ju] to destroy the statues and they collected the precious stones, jewelries, gold and silver. All the things in the Phodrang and Deyang College were destroyed completely. [Trindor-during the Cultural Revolution Deyang was entirely empty inside.] In Gomang, there were 16 khamtsen and Loseling had 23 khamtsen. Among these 39 khamtsen, except for Tsha khamtsen, all the others were destroyed. This Tsha Khamtsen was said to be needed to show exhibitions. The cadres of the Financial Office in Lhasa and cadres in Drepung took the youngsters to destroy the things. The thankas and pecha were burned and the earthen statues were thrown into the garbage.   

**Q:**  Was there a special reason for destroying only Deyang?   

**A:**  There were many protective deities on the top floor in Deyang. So they were supposed to dislike this. After destroying the top floor, they also destroyed the things in the dukhang.   

**Q:**  How did they differentiate when they send out 360 monks and the left 360 monks in the monastery during the Cultural Revolution?   

**Q:**  At that time, they had already destroyed the statues, stupas and pecha [Tib. སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་རྟེན]. After the statues were destroyed, then they held a meeting of the 700 monks in Drepung and said, "Now it is the Cultural Revolution and we have destroyed the "old," so in the future there will be no religious practice in the monastery. So if you stay in the monastery there is no point. So if you want to go home to your families, or if you want to go to join some work units, we will write letters of introduction. But if you stay here, later if you want to go to a work unit,it will be difficult." So as I mentioned above, many younger monks left at this time. Some went to the grain office, some to the construction unit.   

**Q:**  Were these people volunteers or picked up?   

**A:**  They left in a desparate situation [Tib. འུ་མ་ཐུག] thinking anyway they will not let us stay. Some went to the Military Supply Depot and some to the Cement Factory and some also went to the Construction Unit [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན་ལས་ཁུངས] and some went home.   

**Q:**  In general, were those left in the monasteriy the old people?   

**A:**  Yes, most of them were old and some have died.   

**Q:**  So they reduced the monks twice; the first in 1959 and second during the Cultural Revolution, right?   

**A:**  Yes. From the 360 who stayed, there are now about 40 or so left in the monastery. All the others died. The other older monks are mainly ones who returned to their villages and ones who were released from the Labor Camp and the ones who were in the city. After these monks returned to the monastery, now I hear that there are about 100 monks in the monastery.   

**Q:**  When did they start making the policy loose?   

**A:**  In 1978, since the 3rd session of the 11th Party Congress [Tib. ཏང་གི་སྐབས་བཅུ་གཅིག་པའི་ཀྲུང་ཨུ་ཚང་འཛོམས་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཐེངས་གསུམ་པ] was held, the open door policy was implemented and the economy was made more lively [Tib. འཁྲུག]. And they implemented the nationality policy and the religiuous policy and they started renovating the monasteries though we didn't hold the tsog (prayer assembly meetings). Then in 1980, on the 4th of 6th lunar month, the day commemorating the Buddha's first teaching of the Four Noble Truths [Tib. ཏྲུག་པ་ཚེས་བཞི] they started holding tsog in Drepung.   

**Q:**  This was when Hu Yaobang came to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Was it? I don't remember. From then on, we started doing the gelong's confessional assembly (Tib. སོཇོང [ གསོ་སྦྱོང]) on the 8th, 10th, 15th, 25th and 30th (nyatong gyesum /nyernga tseju [Tib. ཉ་སྟོང་རྒྱས་གསུམ་ཉེར་ལྔ་ཚེས་བཅུ]) and also the summer retreat (yarne [Tib. དབྱར་གནས]) These didnt start all at once, they started gradually.   

**Q:**  When you first held the tsog, was it told by the Department of Religious Affairs (chödönjü [Tib. ཆོས་དོན Ch. ju]) to do it, or did the Democratic Mangement Committee ask them for permission to do it?   

**A:**  During the Cultural Revolution, the monks couldnt wear monks robes and recite mani prayers, but later from one side, the policy became loose from above and the masses also reported that we need to hold the tsog on the 8th, 10th, 15th 25th and 30th days of the lunar month. So they said it is okay.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there in 1980?   

**A:**  There were about 160-70 monks like us. At that time, we held the tsog in Pombara khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Were these the monks who stayed continiuosly after the Cultural Revolution or were there some new monks?   

**A:**  At this time, there were no new monks.   

**Q:**  After some monks were sent to the work units after 1959, when did they start coming back to the monastery?   

**A:**  The new monks started getting admitted in 1982.   

**Q:**  Not the new monks. When did the old monks start coming back to the monastery.   

**A:**  The monks who were sent to the Labor Camp and didn't have homes started coming back before 1980 when the policy became a little better, because they work units didn't want them and there was no place to send them and we were actually short of monks to do the jobs such as taking care of the temples. And from 1982, they started admiting new monks and also the old monks came back and their ration cards and residence permits [Tib. ཟ་འབྲུ་ཐེམ་ཐོ] were also transferred to the monastery. When they admitted the first new monks in 1982, the Department of Religious Affairs said, "if they were old monks who knew the sutra and tantra well [Tib. མདོ་སྒགས] they should be admitted. Also, those older ones who were in good physical condition should be admitted, but those who were old and not knowledgeable and in poor health shouldn't be admitted." But actually those old monks hadn't been sleeping in the monastery, they had been working in the monastery, so they should be taken care of. We admitted older monks and also some young monks and at that time there was no exam. After that, we admitted young monks who didn't have problem with their five organs [Tib. དབང་པོ་ལྔ] (who were not disabled) through taking an exams of consisting of memmorizing about 30-40 long pages of pecha (rligious texts).   

**Q:**  In the beginning, when you admitted the monks, did you have to ask the Department of Religious Affairs like nowadays?   

**A:**  Yes, we have to report the names, ages, birthplaces, the county where they belonged and the gegen of the young monks to the Department of Religious Affairs. Then through the approval of the Department of Religious Affairs, they got admitted and their ration card and residence permits were transferred.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, when the new monks were admitted, was it easy to get their ration card and the residence permits transferred?   

**A:**  It was easy up to 1986 because there was the Police Station [Ch. pai chu suo] there. After 1986, no one has been able to get their ration card and the residence cards transferred.   

**Q:**  When the policy became loose in 1978, how many monks were left in the monastery who stayed there continuously from 1959?   

**A:**  Maybe about 250. At that time, many monks died every year because all of them were old. In each year about 20 of them died.   

**Q:**  From 1982 till now, what was the time when there were the highest number of monks?   

**A:**  It was in 1985 at the time of 1st Mönlam. At that time we had about 450 monks.   

**Q:**  How many new monks did you admit at each time after 1982?   

**A:**  In 1986, a small amount of monks were admittled, in 1990, about 60-70 were admitted, but some older monks died, some young monks were imprisoned, some went to India, and some went back to the villges. So the number became less.   

**Q:**  From 1982, did they admit a fixed number of new monks every year?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  How many are there here who are not in the official monastic community (Tib. དྲིག [སྒྲིག])?   

**A:**  There are little over 200.   

**Q:**  How many are there who in the drig?   

**A:**  There are about 400.   

**Q:**  Are you working with the apples?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When were the apples planted?   

**A:**  They were planted starting from 1964 up to 1968. We now have about 7,000 apple and pear trees.   

**Q:**  What is the main work that has to be done with the apple trees?   

**A:**  The main regular work is irrigation and fertilization in winter and spring. We are fertilizing now. And soon after the Tibetan new year and Mönlam, we have to prune the trees. In fall, there is a lot of works plucking apples and selling apples.   

**Q:**  How many workers are there?   

**A:**  We have about 20 workers with the apples.   

**Q:**  Do they have to work all year round?   

**A:**  These 20 have year round work. Now they get off on 4 Sundays and for the tsog held on 8th, 15th and 30th. During fall, when there is a lot of work, they can't go to the tsog, but get their share of the alms.   

**Q:**  How much salary do the workers get paid in a year?   

**A:**  We used the work point system of calulation for all the activites of production in the monastery like the restaurant and the shops. All the income was merged together for the common, regardless of their income. They distributed the work points according to the work during 6 months at the beginning of the July. There was less income in the 1st half of year. E.g., the könyer got about ¥1,000 and the other monk workers get ¥800-900. In the 2nd half, there was more profit, e.g., from the apples we got about 100,000 yuan and the restaurant and the shop's income was kind of regular. So the 2nd half income was more.   

**Q:**  Last year, did the apple workers get the total of about ¥3,000 for the entire year?   

**A:**  No, it was a little over ¥2,000. The könyer made a little over ¥3,000 since they worked every day. The others made less since they had 9 days off each month.   

**Q:**  How much alms would they get?   

**A:**  Gye was about 900 last year including the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  [Trindor la] There were also two dharma teachings (Tib. sungchö [གསུང་ཆོས]) so you had a good income, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Counting the others, then they get over ¥3000 in a year, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Counting the work points and the gye, we got that amount. [Trindor la, not in the tape] actually they got ¥450 in the sungchö in fall, and 900 for gye and the spring sungchö, so with about 200 for garma they were proably near 4,000 yuan or about ¥330 per month]   

**Q:**  How do you decide who works and who doesn't? What are the rules?   

**A:**  Among us, the younger ones, there are about 90 who study tsenyi (scriptures). There are also about 10 who are learning tantric rituals (ngagchog [Tib. སྔགས་ཆོག]). The rest of the younger ones who are in the drig and who are able to work, are working in their own work units. The child monks who are in the drig, but who are too young to work are in the school. And there are also many of them who are cooks, drivers, shepherds, nomads and working in the restaurants and shops and in the apple grove, etc. Then there are about 200 of them who are not in the drig (registered as monks in Drepung) and work. We pay them wages when they work. If there is no work, we send them to study pecha. But those who are in the drig, all have to work. And then those in the drig and who are too old to work, we put them in the Old People's Home.   

**Q:**  When (what age) do you put them in the Old People's Home?   

**A:**  According to the original rules of the government it is over 60 for men. But there are many who are over 60 about 70, but who can work as tsenyi gegen (scriptual teachers) and the gegen of the dönkhatre and könyer (chapel supervisiors) so are still working.   

**Q:**  What about those who want to be pechawa (scholar monks) but can't get admitted, how do you decide that?   

**A:**  There is a limit for that. Last year, we added some to the tsenyi (scripture scholar) group from the workers. Last year, we checked whether the workers can study pechawa or not while working, and we gave a test to see what kind of foudnation they had---we gave a test on the text ngöntogyen [Tib. མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན] and umajugba [Tib. དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པ]. Even if they can't recite the umajugba, they must be able to recite the ngöntogyen.   

**Q:**  Did the Democratic Mangement Committee give the test?   

**A:**  Yes. For the tantra (study), they had to be able to recite text of Yamantaka (jigje [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད]). So there were many who want to study pecha, but if we made all of them into pechawa, then we wouldn't have enough money to support their livelihood becauese they have no work points and the government doesn't give us anything. On the other hand, we make the monks who are not in the drig work in the restaurant and shop, etc. Our plan is that if we are permitted to admit some more monks, then we will make some more pechawa, but now new monks are not being admitted. Now, the government not only doesn't pay money to the pechawa, but also doesn't pay a single fen to the gegen. The Democratic Mangement Committee pays some money to ten some gegen and they pay the young monks ¥3.5 or ¥4 per day. If the monastery is kind of rich we can pay some money, but since the monastery has to live on one's own toil, we have to hold up the production and earn some money, because if we do not, we don't have any other source of money.   

**Q:**  Do the all the monks working on the apple trees and also in the restaurant, etc., get the same ampount of work points.   

**A:**  Yes. All the money we get from the different work units are merged together in the common and they pay the work units. If we didn't do that, some would have a good income and some wouldn't have much. If each work unit paid money to their own memebers, the one's working in the restaurent and the shop would become rich individually.   

**Q:**  How many work points were there last year?   

**A:**  The könyer get the most--they get about ¥2,400-2,500 because they didn't have even a single day off.   

**Q:**  Can könyer take leave and put in a subsittute?   

**A:**  In general, they never close the temple, but if they were sick or had to visit their friends or their friends come to visit, he can get a substitute, but this is rare since the könyer are old and their gidru (monk wards) would do the shopping. But the young monks would have to go home for the New Year or the Wönkor [Tib. འོང་སྐོར] Festival where they carry the scriptures around the fields.   

**Q:**  Do they get the money for the Old People's Home from the Five Guarantees Welfare System (genlennga [Tib.འགན་ལེན་ལྔ]) because they didn't have a family and children, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They used to get ¥18 per month. Then in 1985 it was increased to ¥30 per month. But actually, nowadays the ration grain cost and the oil cost has risen so much that this isn't enough; and they also have to buy clothes, butter and meat. But it was good that they get the shares of the gye/phog (alms and salary). If they didn't have gye/phog, it would be really very difficult.   

**Q:**  What is the diference between the monks who have the ration card and the residence permit and those who don't ?   

**A:**  Oh there is a big differnce. For exmaple, the government sells grain to those who have the ration card and the residence permit.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the grain prices of the government and of the market?   

**A:**  Im not sure what the maket rates are for these.   

**Q:**  How much is it if you buy from the government?   

**A:**  Trindor la: the government tsamba is ¥0.41/gyama and the market price for a better quality tsamba is ¥1.00 per gyama and for the regular qualilty it is ¥0.70- ¥0.80.   

**A:**  The government pays ¥5 for buying meat per month?   

**Q:**  Do you get both tsamba and flour?   

**A:**  We buy flour and rice from the government and mostly we buy flour. It can be exchanged for better quality tsamba from our homes. There is no tsamba from the government. Trindor la: The government tsamba isn't good quality. [Trindor la not in the tape] So we buy it and then give it to beggars, etc. We really buy our eating tsamba from the countryside].   

**Q:**  How much do you get from the government for each person?   

**A:**  The government sells the workers 34 gyama per month. Those who are not working, and children and the people in the Old People's Home, they get 26 gyama. The government also sells each person one gyama of cooking oil and also gives a pass to buy 12 kg of kerosene per month, and 14 kg for a 2 person household who has the residence permit. [not on the tape]. In the society, they sell these passes for ¥0.5 per kg and then they have to pay the ¥0.8 actual price.]   

**Q:**  If you don't have the residence permit, were you allowed to go to the Old People's Home?   

**A:**  No, because they don't get the relief of living in the Old People's Home. The Department of Religious Affairs has the name list of the people who get the relief.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa, when the villagers come to work, they have to pay ¥1 to the Police Station for registration [Tib. འགྲུལ་ཐོ]. Do the monks have to pay this ?   

**A:**  No. Trindor la: They take it from the construction workers, but not from the monks.   

**Q:**  So it seems to me that nowadays, the livelhood of the monks is sort of okay [Tib. ཨའུ་ཙམ]?   

**A:**  Yes. Trindor la: I heard that Sera is poorer than Drepung and that they are complaining a lot about their suffering.   

**Q:**  Is Drepung the best among the three monastic seats?   

**A:**  The livelihood of the masses is okay. In terms of work point income, probably it is about the same. Trindor la: Your apples are better than Sera's.   

**A:**  We have apples but they have good peaches from which they get a good income. So in terms of production distribution, Sera is better than us. As for the pechawa fee, ours is better. For example, we pay pechawa ¥3.5 per period [Tib. བདུ་དུས] and for one period we pay ¥4 per period and Sera pays only ¥2 per period. We also pay some money on the 8th, 15th and the 30 by collecting the donations. Although we don't have any accumulation, we also think about the livelihood of the people who don't work, the children and the Old People's Home.   

**Q:**  Do you get the afternnon tea free?   

**A:**  Its free. Each person in the organization (the monastery) (drig) gets one 5 liter thermos [Ch. wu bang] of tea per day. Sometimes they also get food free.   

**Q:**  Does the Department of Religious Affairs or the Democratic Mangement Committee have the power to decide the religious activities like the teaching in the chöra and going for the chöthog (study semester), etc?   

**A:**  The monastery itself decides this. Because even if they [government] try to do that, they don't know religion.   

