# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0210.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Rinzin Wangpo [Tib. རིག་འཛིན་དབང་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**Â©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kalimpong, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1984  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Rinzin Wangpo  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 64  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Rinzin Wangpo was Tibetan monk who becasme a Hinayana monk/gelong and spent time teaching Tibetan in England and Sri Lanka. He also worked for his uncle Tharchi Babu on his famous Tibetan newspaper produced in Kalimpong. In this interview, Rigzin Wangpo talks about the disagreement between Langdün and Reting regarding Langdün's support of the candidacy of the son of Phogpön Senangse [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན་སྲས་ནང་སྲས] as the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama and how it was eventually decided by Reting through the lake vision. He also talks about the arrival of Wang Dongxing, the Khyungram incident, how Taktra requested Reting to give the regency to him and Reting’s murder. He discusses the death of the Lhündrub dzongpön, how Kapshöba was demoted twice and later became a Shape, and about the street songs sung then. Additionally, he discusses how Janglojen and Kujar stayed with Tharchin Babu, and about Janglojen’s article on old age and the children which was originally a work of the Gungthang, ?? and the meeting between Panda Raga, Künphel la and Janglojen.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0210_02/H_0210_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Do you remember how the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama was brought to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, I remember.   

**Q:**  Then what happened to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdün? When did he resign or how was it?   

**A:**  I don't know the year.   

**Q:**  I know the year.   

**A:**  I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> and Reting the Regent did not get along well.   

**Q:**  How was it?   

**A:**  Most probably, they did not agree upon the new reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> believed that the son of the Payroll Officer, Phogpön Senangse [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན་སྲས་ནང་སྲས] was the true reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. THat boy later became <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་དྲུག] Name of a famous incarnate lama and his labrang or religious corporation.">Ditrug</a> [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག] Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  It was also said a horse from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> went to Langdön, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was true. A horse of the previous Dalai Lama broke out of its stable in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and went straight to Senangse's house. Such an unusual incident took place.   

**Q:**  Then they say that the deity Kamasha [Tib. སྐར་མ་ཤག] had also predicted that the Dalai Lama's reincarnation will be born in Langdön, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was said in the sign [Tib. བརྟག་གཞི] they normally show and Langdön was thinking that this was the reincarnation. However, Reting would not accept this. He carried on the search according to the vision he had seen at the lake and the present Dalai Lama was chosen as the true reincarnation. As a result there was some misunderstanding between them. Due to this, he resigned from the Prime Ministership.   

**Q:**  The result was that Langdön was made to resign. The Assembly went and asked him to resign. What was the reason?   

**A:**  I don't have a very clear idea about this.   

**Q:**  Do you remember Langdön's resignation? Probably, it was the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a>, [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] Prayer Festival?   

**A:**  Yes, probably.   

**Q:**  Then during the 14th Dalai Lama's enthronement, didn't the Chinese come once again to Tibet?   

**A:**  Wang Dongxing, who was the overall one in charge of the Tibet-Mongolia office came to Tibet at that time. He offered presents to all the higher kudrak.   

**Q:**  They also gave my father a large yellow brocade on which something was written about the Demo Huthogthu in Chinese and Tibetan. He might have given that to all the lamas.   

**A:**  At that time, my maternal uncle was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> who later became the Khenche and he worked in the Dalai Lama's treasury or Dzöbu [Tib. མཛོད་སྦུག]. His name was Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས].   

**A:**  Was he among the 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> who all got demoted at once for the fire incident in Laja?   

**A:**  No. That was later when there was a fire in the Tara Temple [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང]. Before that, he resigned from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> and also from being a monk official, but later he was promoted to Khenche and worked in the Dzöbu. This was the same time as when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> resigned from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> position and became the Khenche.   

**Q:**  At that time, people said that they put a yellow halter [Tib. མཐུར་མགོ་སེར་པོ] on them, right? [this means the horses and mules in Norbulinga had yellow halters and they don't have work, so this was used as an proverb when some officials were kicked out from a good job and promoted to a higher position without work]   

**A:**  Yes, When the two of them held their ceremony in the Nendrön House, I heard that the two of them said, "We two became <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> at the same time and we are making the salutation [this means they got resigned from their good job and became Khenche] at the same time." At that time, some sweepers said,"These two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> were said to be very sassy, today they also said something sarcastic."   

**Q:**  What did they mean when they said that?   

**A:**  They were saying that they beat around the bush. [Tib. སྐོར་བ་རྒྱབ]. Finally, my uncle died in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> when he was staying with the one in charge, the Nechung Depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ] .   

**Q:**  Then do you remember about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> being terminated from the government service?   

**A:**  Yes, I remember it. This incident took place after the Dalai Lama was enthroned and the first strand of his hair was cut [Tib. དབུ་སྐྲ་གཙུག་ཕུད] and he formally became a monk [Tib. རབ་བྱུང].   

**Q:**  The strand of his hair was cut, but he was yet to become a monk.   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. After that they said that the Regent should be offered a gift showing appreciation and thanking him for his services. A <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> (Full Assembly) was convened to discuss what reward should be given to the regent.   

**Q:**  Who suggested this?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> must have made the suggestions. Reting Labrang expected to receive a large tract of land in the northern region. The kudraks who were friendly with Reting insisted that the land should be given to him. However, there were others who did not agree with this. They contended that if the government started giving such large portions of land to every Regent and family members of the Dalai Lama, then in the future there will be no land left in government hands and all the land would belong to private individuals. Therefore they objected to such gifts. Probably, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> was the main person who raised the objection, but those opposed to him were too powerful and in bitterness, Khyungram said, "Not being full even after eating the mountain and not getting quenched even after drinking the ocean." [Tib. རི་བོ་ཟོས་ནས་མ་འགྲངས། རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཏུང་ནས་མ་ངོམ]. His opposition said that he has insulted the Regent and he was therefore punished. Khyungram's son was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> in the Kham area so he was also arrested and brought to Lhasa. Khyungram himself was banished to the Tö area. The day he was to be banished, he was given a public lashing at Shöl. We went to watch it. My maternal uncle was close to Khyungram and I was staying near the western gate. I offered him a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and an envelope with money when he was taken away riding on an ox.   

**Q:**  What did say?   

**A:**  He said thank you and also said the suspicious greeting word, Tashi Deleg [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས]. Since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>'s daughter was the wife of Drumpa, I had kind of loyalty to him and I felt bad about the way he was being treated and burst into tears.   

**Q:**  Yes, he was treated in that way without any reason.   

**A:**  At that time, the person who acted strongly was Kapshöba.   

**Q:**  What did he do?   

**A:**  He had a kind of grudge.   

**Q:**  I mean what did he do then?   

**A:**  At that time, they held the Trungtsi meeting and issued the verdict. Along with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>, Gajang Tempa was also made to ride an ox and send to exile and Khyungram was sent down towards Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར].   

**Q:**  At that time, what did the people say in Lhasa?   

**A:**  There was a song sung then with the wording, "The wing of the garuda was broken." [Tib. ཁྱུང་གི་གཤོགས་པ་བཅག་ནས].   

**Q:**  The wording was, "The wings of the garuda was broken and claws of the bear were cut off. If you offend the nagas, you will have pimples on your face." [Tib. ཁྱུང་གི་གཤོགས་པ་བཅག་ནས། དོམ་གྱི་སྡེར་མོ་བཀོག་སོང། ཀླུ་ལ་གནོད་པ་བཏང་ན། གདོང་ལ་ཐོར་པ་སྐྱེས་ཡོང].   

**A:**  Yes. All his property was sealed and confiscated. There were lot of flower pots at his house and all these were taken away to the summer cottage of Reting. At that time he suffered a lot of hardship. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> had two wives; one from Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར] and another one.   

**Q:**  He also send back his wives?   

**A:**  Yes. Since one of his daughters was given to Drumpa, he stayed in Drumpa for quite a long time.   

**Q:**  Then later Reting Rinpoche resigned. What was the reason?   

**A:**  According to one version - <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> went and requested that Reting to permit him to be the Regent for a certain period of time because his own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> had declined considerably and he wanted to restore and improve it. If he became the Regent then he would secure considerable help from the government to renovate the labrang. He promised to return the regentship after 3 years - sort of taking the Regentship as a lease. This is what people were saying. Reting Rinpoche just could not reject this request since Taktra had pleaded so strongly. So Reting agreed and said that he would go to his monastery for 3 years and after that he would return and Taktra must return the regency. This was their inner conversation. To the outsiders, it was let iy be known that Reting wished to resign and go to his monastery and stay in retreat for 3 years and practice his dharma. So he asked the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> to let him resign and told them that Taktra should be appointed as the Regent and Reting went to his monastery. Then after 3 years, Reting came to Lhasa. Actually Taktra should have handed over the Regency as promised but when Reting arrived they did not receive him with open arms. Reting was deeply hurt and he had to go back in an embarrassment manner. The people working under Reting could not tolerate such gross breach of trust and insult. The insisted to their master that they should get back the Regency and hence they started creating problems and trouble against Taktra. Actually it's very difficult for us to say what they actually said to each other, but the things I told you were the common speculation going around Lhasa at that time. Some said that Reting contacted the Guomindang and he wanted to bring about a change in the Tibetan religion-political scene. Anyway, there was lot of confusion and intrigues and as a result, Reting's brother who was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས་བླ་མ], and Khartho [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] Rimpoche got into serious trouble. Reting was arrested and imprisoned at Sharchenjok. Nyungne Lama escaped dressed in layman's clothes. The soldiers gave chase and he ran to the place of a Nepalese woollen cloth merchant whom he knew well. This house was at the old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> [Tib. རྨེ་རུ], situated on the opposite side of Numa. He did not stop there, but continued his flight leaving through the back entrance and crossed over to the house of Numa. He was not able to shake off the soldiers and there were no way to escape so he hid in the toilet, but the soldiers had seen him and they opened fire and he was killed there. His body had been left outside the toilet and we went to look at it.   

**Q:**  I heard that the government announced that he had shot himself?   

**A:**  No. The soldiers shot him. However, some say that he first opened fire upon the soldiers and then the soldiers shot him. Another version is that the soldiers did not shoot him, but he shot himself.   

**Q:**  Did you see the dead body?   

**A:**  Yes, I saw it.   

**Q:**  Where had the bullet gone through?   

**A:**  I couldn't see that. It was covered with a big army hat.   

**Q:**  He was wearing a monk's robe.   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. He was wearing a chuba. They had covered the body with a sheet. So that's the end of Nyungne Lama. Then Khardo Lama and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> (Reting's brother) were kept under custody at the Gusung Bodyguard Regiment. Then there was lot of trouble.   

**Q:**  Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  When Reting was arrested, I was at Lhasa. They had sent Lhalu and Surkhang to bring him to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you know the day when these two left?   

**A:**  I had heard that the soldiers had gone to Reting before that.   

**Q:**  All this done with great secrecy, so how did you know that?   

**A:**  Yes - it was done in secret, but somehow you came to hear about it. We heard that the soldiers were leaving in two groups - one going from the upper Phembo region and the other going from the lower region. All this information spreads from one person to another.   

**Q:**  They put the seal of confiscation on the Reting Labrang [in Lhasa] on the same day. What were people saying about this in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I don't have much to say about this. Some people were saying that it is terrible and they were very sad. Whereas some were saying that after what Reting had done to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>, it serves him right to be paid in the same coin. It's Karma. He had even carried away Khyungram's flower pots! The main cause for Reting's problem was due to Reting Dzasa and Nyungne Lama's funny activities and there was also Phünkhang Jedrung.   

**Q:**  What did he do?   

**A:**  At that time, Reting was kind of fond of him like a favorite. Phünkhang Jedrung and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> were playing mahjong, so Phünkhang also faced misfortune.   

**Q:**  Before Reting's problem started there was the Lhündrup Dzong problem. How did this start?   

**A:**  During the Lhündrup Dzong trouble, I think the monks had behaved rather badly. At that time the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> Chömpel Thubden's brother was the acting dzongpön.   

**Q:**  He was killed, was not he? The monk's of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>, however, said that he was not killed.   

**A:**  People say that he was killed. It is said that they picked up the firepot (on which the tea pot is kept to keep it hot) and put it on his head. Naturally this would burn his head. On top of that they beat him up.   

**Q:**  From where did you hear this?   

**A:**  The people of Phembo were saying like that. Our grandfather is from Phembo Patsab and it was said that our lineage was Patsab Nyima Dragpa [Tib. ཉི་མ་གྲགས་པ] so a lot of people from Phembo would come to our house. They told us. They said that while the acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> was saying his morning prayers, some monks came and at first they hit him, but when it didn't get the necessary result, they picked up the firepot and put it on his head and poured the hot tea on him and beat him again.   

**Q:**  Then did he die?   

**A:**  Yes - he died.   

**Q:**  Did he die in Phembo or at Lhasa?   

**A:**  He died in Phembo itself.   

**Q:**  About this incident - the government says that the trunyichemmo's brother was killed by the monks by being hit on his head with a leg of dry mutton and that he was also stabbed to death. According to the monks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>, they admit that they put the fire pot along with the tea pot on his head, however, they say he did not die. He had pretended to be dead and the monks left him. After that he got up, drafted a report and came to Lhasa and got himself medically treated and got well. Then he threw a party and owing to food poisoning he got sick and died as a result. At that time, when I asked them why didn't you make a report on that, they said that they did not give the monks a chance to defend themselves in front of the investigation committee. Therefore, I just cannot figure out what had really taken place.   

**A:**  According to the people of Phembo, they put the hot fire pot on his head and as a result he died. After they put the fire pot on him, and they also poured hot tea on him, so he couldn't get up because he was wearing a cloak doing his prayers, and he just fell there.   

**Q:**  How long did he survive after getting beaten?   

**A:**  I am not sure about this.   

**Q:**  At that time, many Sera monks were also whipped, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> had to run away. The main persons like Rebe Gyawu and many other monks were arrested and taken to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers. They were given whippings and sent into exile. At that time, it was also said that somebody went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> to deliver something like a bomb.   

**Q:**  This was after that.   

**A:**  This was done by the Reting faction.   

**Q:**  How was your relationship with the Kujar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la?   

**A:**  I didn't have any close relations with him.   

**Q:**  How about Janglojen?   

**A:**  I didn't have relations with him.   

**Q:**  When you went to go India, did you see them?   

**A:**  Yes, they were there. They came there probably in 1938-39 and I was there once in Kalimpong and Tharchin Babu was staying in the market and they came from Assam and they didn't know anybody and two of them stayed with Tharchin Babu.   

**Q:**  How did they stay there?   

**A:**  They didn't get any lodging, so they stayed there for about 10 days and then they rented a house. At that time, they had good relation with Babula and Janglojen wrote the article called, "The advice of the old man and child."  

**Q:**  This was not the one Gungthang composed?   

**A:**  This was composed by Janglojen.   

**Q:**  Can I get one?   

**A:**  Yes, you can. This was printed by Tharchin Babula and in it was mentioned about Janglojen being a student of Tharchin Babu in Gyantse when he learned English and now it was hard to read the small printing block letters as he had gotten old.   

**Q:**  Was this durung the 13th Dalai Lama's time when they set up the school?   

**A:**  Yes, probably, this was around 1915-16-20. At that time, among the students, there were Gyantse Sertsag, Doring [Tib. རྡོ་རིང], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] The name of an important Shigatse aristocratic family.">Delerabten</a> [Tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] and Joktre [Tib. ལྕོག་བཀྲས].   

**Q:**  In 1927, Mr. Lolo or something set up a school, wasn't this the school you mentioned?   

**A:**  This wasn't.   

**Q:**  Where did they set up the school?   

**A:**  They set up the school near Janglo.   

**Q:**  In Janglo the government set up a school and there was Yuthok and Surkhang Dzasa who later died here and also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] The name of an important Shigatse aristocratic family.">Delerabten</a> and Jogtre. Was it not this school?   

**A:**  No, it was a separate one. Many children were enrolled and they taught Tibetan and a little bit of English at the same time, Babula was also preaching some Christianity. Later, the school was banned by the Gyantse Dzong saying that Babula is preaching Christianity. So he had to leave the school. When Janglojen and Tharchin Babu talked about getting old and not being able to see the letters, Babu told him to write something on old age and he will print it. So Janglojen wrote it because Tharchin Babu told him this. At that time, he wrote, "Sonan Gyelpo, [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱལ་པོ], the old father of Janglojen said this reckless things shamelessly. [Tib. གང་བྱུང་ངོ་ཚ་མེད་པར་སྨྲས་པ་འོ]. It was based on Gungthang's composition. At that time, we didn't know about the Gungthang's composition, but later I came to know that Janglojen just made a little bit corrections, otherwise, it was the one Gungthang wrote. After that, Tharchin Babu introduced Janglojen to the Buthanese Palace Trasho [Tib. དྲག་ཤོས] [royals] to teach Tibetan to their children and Kujar was just staying like that. Later they stayed in Abo Raga's house which he had rented. At that time, the British dignitaries treated Kujar well because he used to be the favorite of the Dalai Lama. At that time, Tharchin Babu wrote in the newspaper about the arrival of Kujar Kongphebla [Tib. ཀོང་ཕེབས་ལགས] which means the one who came from Kongpo, instead of writing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la. At that time, the Kujar, Raga, Gendün Chomphel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] got together for making a plan about some kind of democracy.   

**Q:**  Please tell me this in detail.   

**A:**  They made a democracy plan like the Chinese <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a>'s "Three Principle of the People." [Ch. sam min zhu yi; Tib. མི་སེར་དོན་གསུམ་རིང་ལུགས]. At that time, since I was child I just heard about it and was not attentive.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were not that young.   

**A:**  I was only 18 then.   

**Q:**  You could not be that young. You said that you were 13 when the Dalai Lama died and the talk of the Three Principle of People was very late.   

**Q:**  It was around 1938-38 and I was 18.   

**Q:**  This was the time when the present Dalai Lama came up, right?   

**A:**  This was before that.   

**Q:**  It was after that in the 1940s.   

**A:**  After I came up, the Dalai Lama had been invited [to Lhasa] and it was 1941.   

**Q:**  It was 1939.   

**A:**  At that time, they made the plan for a democracy and also made a flag or emblem for that and Tharchin Babula was also involved in it. In the beginning, he said that this is very good and you should make that in Tibet. If you don't have democracy in Tibet, Tibet can't get developed. Later, when they did that for a while, since Tharchin Babu was very clever, he withdrew from that and I think he might have send some information to Tibet saying that they were doing this. Their internal plan was to draw the higher <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> on their side and that's why they used Gendün Chönphel. After that, Gendün Chönphel was arrested in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  For what?   

**A:**  It was said outwardly that he made false hundred <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> notes and probably it was for checking what documents he had that they raided his house and arrested him]. The government also raided the house of Kujar and those people and they told Raga that he was not allowed to stay in India.   

**Q:**  Now, we can't get those documents, right?   

**A:**  It is very difficult. You can try to get it from his son Sonam by not mentioning about this and saying that since he was a great scholar, we want to publish his compositions.   

**Q:**  Was he the real son of Raga?   

**A:**  No, he was adopted.   

**Q:**  Basically, do they have the documents?   

**A:**  Yes, they have them unless he had burned them because of the fear that other people would get it. That person was a strange one.   

**Q:**  I heard that they printed a book in Calcutta.   

**A:**  They had a plan to print it, but I think they couldn't.   

**Q:**  They printed the book and Raga also gave it to some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and there are many who say that they saw it. Later, Kujar worked for Reting Simpön la [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་ལགས] in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  When you were in Lhasa at the time of the Reting, did you see Tharchin Babu's newspaper?   

**A:**  He wrote a little book about this saying that Reting faced misfortune in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did he write how Reting was killed?   

**A:**  No, he didn't.   

**Q:**  Some people told me that Tharchin Babu wrote very clearly how Reting was killed, right?   

**A:**  I think later on he wrote a little about that when I was in Tibet, but I don't remember that.   

**Q:**  At that time, it was said that he was killed, but he didn't know in detail how he was killed, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after few months it was said that Reting didn't die from sickness but he was killed. At that time, in Sharchenjok, the kind of prison guard there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and the lay official and the lay official was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son one who became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དཔོན] The mayor of Lhasa during the traditional era. The head of the Nangtsesha Office [tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤར].">mipön</a> and the tsidrung was the one nicknamed Nepalese, Bepola [Tib. བལ་པོ་ལགས]. It was said that probably the two of them killed Reting.   

**Q:**  I have to tell you something. Please don't get upset. When I listened to your interview, you just mentioned soe things roughly and didn't me tell in detail. Please tell me in detail.   

**A:**  I just told you whatever I heard. Otherwise, it was troublesome.   

**Q:**  You can just tell me whatever you heard. Otherwise, we were not there at that time and you were there, but not among the people doing the work then. No matter, whether it is reliable or not it doesn't matter because this is not something to be regarded as general.   

**A:**  I heard that they two of them killed Reting because the two of them didn't get along well with Reting.   

**Q:**  This is true, but how did they kill him?   

**A:**  Before that, Reting got a cold and was feeling slightly sick and they reported that Reting is not feeling well. Then anyway, they killed Reting. They thought that if they use weapons, it might not go through [because of his protective talisman], so they squeezed his testicles and killed him.   

**Q:**  As I told you yesterday, I talked with Dando [Tib. དར་མདོ] Rimpoche and he said, "At that time, in the newspaper of Tharchin Babu, it was written, "Reting's testicles was smashed with a stone and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> stood at the backside and suffocated Reting's mouth with his hands and pulled him back and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son put a slate [on the ground] on which he placed some cotton and then he used a pestle and smashed his testicles." Then the tsidrung was shocked when Reting screamed loudly which many people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> like the Simpönla heard this.   

**A:**  I also heard that he screamed loudly. In Lhasa, we heard that they squeezed the testicles and I didn't hear about smashing them with stone and I was not attentive about the newspaper.   

**Q:**  If Tharchin la had written so clearly, he might have heard that from a reliable source.   

**A:**  I don't think he have written so clearly.   

**Q:**  Dando Rinpoche told me that he saw the newspaper and he also showed it to Tsarong.   

**A:**  Then they brought his body to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> and I went for an audience [Tib. གདུང་མཇལ] and I saw that they had covered his face with a red colored thin silk [Tib. སྨན་རྩེ] which was soaked with blood.   

**Q:**  I heard he was bleeding so much and it was dripping from his lower garment.   

**Q:**  I heard that his penis had swollen and become very big and there was a bruise on the back side.   

**Q:**  If they had smashed the testicles, it would not get swollen.   

**A:**  When we look at the swollen penis, it shows that his testicle was squeezed and when they let it go, the blood flowed and became like that.   

**Q:**  These events were terrible, right?   

**A:**  Yes, since then the glory and the power [Tib. དབང་ཐང] of Tibet declined.   

**Q:**  What happened after Reting?   

**A:**  After Reting was killed, all the pro-Reting kudraks faced misfortune.   

**Q:**  Right at that time, they sealed the Phünkhang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> houses. What else happened after that?   

**A:**  There wasn't any big chaos after the Sera disturbance was calmed.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chinese hadn't come, right?   

**A:**  The Communist Chinese had not arrived, but the Guomindang was there.   

**Q:**  This was just an office and they didn't have any power.   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  At that time, the communist power was about to come, right?   

**A:**  Not yet I think.   

**Q:**  At that time, the shapes were Lhalu and the Kapshöba.   

**A:**  There was Surkhang also. By something happened to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and he got demoted.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  I don't remember that.   

**Q:**  Before that, it was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> will be demoted and when people went to watch the fun, they splashed them with boiled water from the roof top.   

**A:**  This is what happened. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was demoted twice. At that time, there was a song with the wording, "In the Naga's palace of Kapshöba, the lady is like the butter decoration on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> is like white bread. Please think about it." [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་ཀླུ་ཡི་ཕོ་བྲང། ལྷ་ལྕམ་མར་གྱི་དཀར་རྒྱན། སྐུ་ངོ་ཀོ་ཀུན་དཀར་པོ། ཐུགས་བསམ་བཞེས་རོགས་གནང་དང].   

**Q:**  What does this mean?   

**A:**  It means that Kabshöpa took loans like fetching water and built a very good house. After that, Kabshöpa didn't have much power. There was another song saying," From the roof top of Kabshöpa, they shot a slingshot with gold biscuits and it landed on Reting's roof top] [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་ཐོག་ཁའི་སྒང་ནས། འུར་རྡོ་གསེར་གྱི་ལེབ་ལྕུག། རྭ་སྦྲེང་ཐོག་ཁར་བབ་སོང]. This must be when he asked for the shape.   

**Q:**  He was appointed shape by Taktra.   

**A:**  Probably, that must be when he was appointed as a tsipön.   

**Q:**  There was another song, "Kabshöpa performed miracle and flew a golden plane and the plane turned around and landed in the Tsikhang." [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་སྤྲུལ་པ་མཁས་ནས། གསེར་གྱི་གནམ་གྲུ་བཏང་སོང། གནམ་དྲུ་ལྡིང་སྐོར་བརྒྱབས་ནས། རྩིས་ཁང་ནང་ལ་བབ་སོང].   

**A:**  Yes, they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> it for a short time.   

**Q:**  During the Reting incident they didn't stick posters, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after that, I didn't stay in Tibet very much and in the 6th month of the Fire Hog year [1947], I came down here [to India].   

**Q:**  Where did you go then?   

**A:**  When Drumpa Lobsang Phüntso [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཕུན་ཚོགས] went to Darjeeling to be the teacher, I was with him and I was called by Tharchin Babu and then I worked on the newspaper of Tharchin Babu. At that time, he didn't write about Reting.   

**Q:**  What year was the Fire Hog?   

**A:**  It was 1947 when India gained its independence.   

**Q:**  In that year, the Tibetan mission to congratulate the victory of World War II, the Yügyal Tashi Delek [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས] mission was sent led by Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད] right? How did that happen?   

**A:**  There were two delegations; one attended the Asian Meeting. Its leader was Sambo. The mission for the Yügyal Tashi Delek came to Kalimpong and their interpreter was a Nepalese and they went to America. I think at that time, they couldn't work on Tibetan independence.   

**Q:**  Why did they go for the Yügyal Tashi Deleg and what did they do?   

**A:**  They went to congratulate the victory of the Second World War. At that time, when I arrived in England, after two days, they also came to London, but I couldn't meet them.   

**Q:**  At that time, there wasn't any talk about Tibet in England, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, they didn't go to England and they sent the congratulations through the ambassador in India.   

**A:**  Then this must be the Trade Mission.   

**Q:**  There was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> in the Trade Mission.   

**A:**  And there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> and Changkhyim [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ] Khenjung.   

**Q:**  The Nepalese interpreter was still in Nepal. Do you know his name?   

**A:**  No.   

