# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0210.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Rinzin Wangpo [Tib. རིན་འཛིན་དབང་པོ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**Â©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kalimpong, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1984  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Rinzin Wangpo  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 64  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Rinzin Wangpo was Tibetan monk who became a Hinayana monk and spent time teaching in England and Sri Lanka. He also worked for his uncle Tharchin Babu on his famous Tibetan newspaper produced in Kalimpong. In this interview, he talks about the influence of the three great monasteries, the Lungshar incident and Trimön’s promotion to Prime Minister. Additionally, he talks about the arrival of Huang Musong and other Chinese officials in Lhasa, the Panchen Lama's bodyguards and about the arrival of the 5 Germans.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0210_01/H_0210_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When the previous Dalai Lama gave his advisory testament in the year of Water-Monkey [Tib. ཆུ་སྤྲེ་ཞལ་གདམས] were you in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did he give the testament?   

**A:**  Before that, the Dalai Lama was not feeling well. At that time the whole population of Tibet performed a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> [Tib. བརྟན་བཞུགས] asked him to live longer. At the same time, they consulted the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> protector through the medium as to what ritual should be performed for the longevity of the Dalai Lama's life? On that occasion the Dalai Lama himself gave the advisory testament. In it he had given a brief but concise autobiography from the time he was chosen as the Dalai Lama. In it he had mentioned that communism has spread in the present ever-changing world. Similarly in the near future, there is a great possibility that communism will pervade in this land where religion and the politics is combined, both from within as well as outside forces like what happened in Dakhural [the capital of Outer Mongolia]. So if we are not careful, it would be very troublesome.   

**Q:**  It also mentioned about the reincarnation of the Khalka Jetsun Dampa [Tib. ཁེ་ཁ་རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ] who was not allowed to be searched for in Dakhural and about the future of the government officials who will be forced to become servants of the enemy, etc [Tib. དགྲ་ཡའི་བྲན་དུ་དབང་མེད་ཏོ་འཁོལ་བ], right?   

**A:**  At the end of his testament he said that his age limit is up to 58 [Tib. ngos bdrang bya nga brgyad du nye ba]. So later he passed away at the age of 58. He also mentioned, "I can see that as long as I live, the situation will remain as it is now [Tib. ངོས་ནམ་འཚོའི་རིང་འདི་མུར་འཁྱོལ་བར་མཐོང] and he also mentioned, "In the future, it would depend on one's own karmic result." [Tib. ཕྱིས་སུ་ནི་རང་རང་གི་མྱོང་བྱ་ཐོག་ཏུ་བབ་པས]. The Government ordered that the testament should be printed and distributed. At that time, people did not pay much attention to his prophetic advices. Once while I was strolling in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> market I saw a print of his testament. I bought it and when I went through it, found it profound. In it he had given an autobiographical testament from the time he was recognized as the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama till the period of his last days. I was very happy to come across this manuscript. The son of Dagpo Drumpa [Tib. dwags po bhrum pa] called Sonam Pandzö [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་མཛོད] was my schoolmate. His wife was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>'s daughter. üö   

**Q:**  He was related to the previous Dalai Lama and he was my paternal uncle.   

**A:**  Since we were schoolmates, he used to like me very much. Every Saturday I would go to the Drumpa's house. Drumpa's son had a keen interest in scriptures and the historical manuscripts.   

**Q:**  Did he? I was thinking that he would just stay home and smoke [opium].   

**A:**  His father would smoke, but he never smoked and gambled like the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and he was a dharma practitioner and would engage in his prayers in the morning and in the evening and I also liked to read scriptures. So once I took the pamphlet of the last Dalai Lama's testament and told him that everybody should pay attention to the Dalai Lama's advice and start thinking seriously about it. Sooner or later the situation would turn out as the Dalai Lama had predicted. Wherever you look the signs are not good and bad times are ahead of us. Basically, being an ordinary man, to predict the future is beyond me, but looking at the changes taking place in the outside would as well as the numerous changes taking place within our government, I become apprehensive and there was fear within my heart. Therefore, if the citizens of Tibet paid close attention to the advice of the Dalai Lama, it would be very good. I told him like that. Drumpa's son was very pleased and told me that although he had heard about the Water-Monkey Year Testament, he had not really paid any attention to it, so he kept the manuscript with him. I also sent one copy to Tharchin Babu and asked him to print it in his newspaper. He printed it in his newspaper and send copies back to Tibet. This helped to publicize the Dalai Lama's advisory Testament. He also wrote in his paper that if we don't do like the proverb, "Learn farming by lookiong at one's neighbor." [Tib. སོ་ནམ་གྲོང་པར་ལྟོས], it would hard in the future. But, the people didn't pay attention to that and the time passed in that way.   

**Q:**  Basically you paid special attention to this particular prophecy of the Dalai Lama; otherwise there were other various prophesies forecasted, but people only quote them after the event has taken place. I guess its human nature to ignore these things before the event, but to get interested only after the predicted event has come to pass. So then the previous Dalai Lama left for his heavenly abode for the benefit of others [Tib. དགོངས་པ་གཞན་དོད་དུ་གཤེགས]. What sickness caused his death?   

**A:**  There are various versions to it. Some say that he died due to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s black magic [Tib. གཏད་སྦས].   

**Q:**  I have never heard about this till today. What is the evidence that support the claim that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had used his black magic to kill the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  At that time, there wasn't any reliable sources, but there were numerous talk about this. People said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> did the arrow divination [Tib. མདའ་མོ] of Gesar and so on. Such talk was rife at that time indicating Lungshar might have done something, but all were just nonsense. These are the voices of the people who did not like Lungshar and it was their malicious gossips. The real reason was that the Dalai Lama wanted to bring about lot of changes in Tibet so as to improve the country. He wrote his plans on the message writing board [Tib. སམ་ཁྲ] and sent them to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> and asked their opinions. At that time, the Dalai Lama wanted to sent a large number of youth to various foreign countries for technical education. However, there were many people in the tsondu who opposed this plan. They contented that if a large number of youths were sent abroad, it would harm the Buddhist religion within Tibet.   

**Q:**  There were many who said that it would harm our religion. How did this happen?   

**A:**  If we were in Tibet at that period such topics and discussions we would not dare to discuss. However, nowadays it won't make any differences. Previously it would be a real problem but now the circumstances have changed.   

**Q:**  If we don't record these things then they might become obscure and forgotten.   

**A:**  So, I was like 18-19-20 years old when I presented this pamphlet, but when the Dalai Lama passed away I was only 13 years old. I was born in the Iron Monkey Year [Tib. ལྕགས་སྤྲེ].   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 64.   

**Q:**  You don't look like in your sixties. You look like even you haven't reached fifty.   

**A:**  As the saying goes, "The affairs of the Tibetan Government is the flat headed Prime Minister's concern." [Tib. སྡེ་པ་གཞུང་གི་ཇུས་གཏོགས་སྡེ་སྲིད་མགོ་ལེབ་པས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རེད] I was very keen and interested in the affairs of the government. I was very observant and used to ponder a lot about the government's policy. In our country Tibet, any new policy is discussed in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> (Full Assembly]. The most important and one of the biggest flaws was that of the intermingling of religion and politics in the government's policy. I think that this has proved very harmful.   

**Q:**  You think that mixing religion with politics was the fault [Tib. སྐྱོན]?   

**A:**  I think so.   

**Q:**  I don't agree with you and I will argue with you.   

**A:**  [laughs] The reason is simple. In the beginning, our religious kings thought that if they mixed politics with religion, then if there was some injustice and unfair means adopted by the politicians then the religious office would set them right. However, in Tibet let's take the example of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> [district heads]. Actually, there are two officers- a lay official and a tsidrung(monk official) but both of them operated with the same motives- there was no difference.  

**Q:**  I don't think that is the system of the religion and politics combined. This was just a gesture [Tib. ཕྱག་རྒྱ] of it.   

**A:**  Maybe I was wrong.   

**Q:**  From the fact that there is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and the lay official it does not prove that Tibet has a system of government in which religion and politics play equal roles. They are the nominal figures to symbolize the dual influence of religion and politics. Who knows whether the tsidrung is a dharma practitioner or not though he might recite some prayers. Perhaps the lay official might even recite more prayers. [laughs]   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. It is not certain. Anyway the main thing is that during <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a>, the three great monasteries wield a tremendous amount of power. Therefore, some abbots misused their influence. "They said that since the beginning of time when the earth was formed such a thing has not happened. If so many new changes are introduced then it will harm our religion and nothing good will come out of it."   

**Q:**  This is their oft-repeated dialogue.   

**A:**  They refused to accept the proposed changes with such powerful opposition from the abbots of the three great monasteries that those who were in favor of modernization were helpless. That was the situation of the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Was it really true?   

**A:**  I think so.   

**Q:**  Please tell me one incident.   

**A:**  For example, the previous Dalai Lama made lot of suggestions and asked their opinions about his suggestions. Among his suggestions, the more important ones were to increase and improve the strength of the political and military offices [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ལས་ཁུངས]. Another important change that he wanted to introduce was to send a large number of youth abroad and make them learn about the functioning of the governmens of the outside world and to be trained in various technical fields so that when they returned, Tibet would benefit. He had sent 5 boys to London with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> as an experiment, but when they returned, they couldn't do anything - they had no achievements.   

**Q:**  It is not that they did not achieve anything. Instead of making them work in whatever field they were trained-they were given assignments in departments about which they were not familiar. The person who had been trained in telegrams was appointed as the salt tax collector, the Tshaho [Tib. ཚྭ་ཤོ]. Another person who had been trained as a soldier was sent to Ruthok [Tib. རུ་ཐོག] as the dzongpön. Therefore, how could they show any achievement? I don't think that these were the faults of the abbots?   

**A:**  The abbots were the main force that made them to be assigned in vague places.   

**Q:**  Who instigated the abbots to do these things?   

**A:**  It's possible that some have instigated them.   

**Q:**  It's more than possible. I think the government officials instigated the abbots and not the other way round. Secondly what power does the Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> have? I perceive the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> to be a hand napkin (someone on whom one can throw the blame when it suits them), to the Kashag and Trungtsi. In reality what power does the tsondu have? The tsondu does not have any power. Tell me the truth. What power the tsondu have? Even you might have attended the tsondu. Since you were a contemporary, you have seen them.   

**A:**  In reality the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> should have power. If you go according to the tradition, then the tsondu must have power. But internally it was very troublesome [Tib. ཅ་ཟིང་པོ] and there were many different things. So I can't tell you that this person had the power. What you said was correct that every things was controlled by the Kashag and the Trungtsi.   

**Q:**  I heard that if the Kashag don't agree, they stick paper notes on the plan and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> had to reconsider. And finally, the regent had to approve it and if he didn't approve it, what would happen?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. In other countries, they have both the religion and the politics, but the religion didn't have the power. But we have the joint power of the religion and politics.   

**Q:**  Yes, you are right. The previous Dalai Lama passed away on the 30th of the Tenth Tibetan month. Can you tell me around what time he died?   

**A:**  I think he passed away at dawn on the 30th. I was in Lhasa at that time.   

**Q:**  How did you know about the death of the Dalai Lama?  

**A:**  The next early morning they announced it. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> oracle came into trance uninvoked on the 29th night. The Dalai Lama passed away on the full moon (30th).   

**Q:**  On that night, didn't they beat the drum [Tib. བརྡ་མ] for the announcement?   

**A:**  He died at the dawn of the 30th.   

**Q:**  I don't think so.   

**A:**  The medium of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> came into a trance uninvoked on the 29th night, right?   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> came while going into trance?   

**A:**  Yes, he came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> while going into trance. While in trance he said the prayer for the reincarnation [of the Dalai Lama] to come soon [Tib. མྱུར་བྱོན་གསོལ་འདེབས].   

**Q:**  Wasn't that the prayer composed by Phurbujog [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་ལྕོག]?   

**A:**  It was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> and at the end of the prayer it was said, "You are staying in the heavenly bode along with the protective deities Nechung and Shri Devi inseparably like your shadow. But we will serve you and remain inseparable. So please come back again for the support of Buddhism and the sentient beings [Tib. དམར་ནག་མགོན་གཉིས་སྐུ་ཡི་གྲིབ་མ་བཞིན། འགྲལ་མེད་ཞིང་ཁམས་པང་དུ་བཞུགས་གྱུར་ཀྱང། སྲི་ཞུ་ཞབས་འདེགས་འབྲལ་མེད་ཞུ་ཟེར་ན། སླར་ཡང་བསྟན་འགྲོའི་མགོན་དུ་མྱུར་བྱོན་ཤོག].   

**Q:**  I think it was after a few days. I don't think it was on the same day?   

**A:**  I think it could have been on that day.   

**Q:**  It could be on the day just after he passed away.   

**A:**  Actually the protective deity himself did the prayer. I don't know exactly if it was on the same day or a few days later. Actually most of the things I am telling you are based on hearsay. So, I cannot be absolutely certain.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama's death when they took down all the window and door decorations and all were in mourning, were you still in Lhasa   

**A:**  At that time I was 13 years old and I was attending school. The school was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] Name of a private school in Lhasa (and the house in which is was located).">Nyarongsha</a> [Tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] which was run by the Tibetan Doctor. [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས་ཨེམ་ཆི་ལགས]   

**Q:**  On that day the school must have closed down and it might have made you happy?   

**A:**  Yes, we did get a holiday, but I was not happy.   

**Q:**  Being a small kid?   

**A:**  Even though I was just a kid I felt like my heart was taken out [Tib. ཁོག་པའི་སྙིང་བཏོན་པ] and we did not enjoy the holiday. On that day, I didn't have my meals. It just happens naturally. When they say that the Dalai Lama passed away our parents were very serious with dark faces. All the window and door decorations and flags all over Lhasa were taken down and wherever one looked no gay flags could be seen fluttering in the wind. Lhasa looked very dark and sad. All the women folks refrained from wearing the colorful aprons and bright ribbons in their hair. Whenever we went the elders would lament about the Dalai Lama's death. The solemn and sober action of the elders affected us and so we also became very sober. Even if we were children we used to think that Dalai Lama is the most precious and the Avalokitaswara and he is the owner of Tibet and if he is no more amidst us then how can we function? On that day we did not have any food. At that time I was staying at my grandmother's place the house called Jüdingling [Tib. ཇུས་འདིངས་གླིང]. In every locality the people would collect together on the roof and they made tea and offered 'Mani' prayers. Then after his death, there was talk that they had failed to disclose about his death. They said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས, the medium of Nechung, and the Dalai Lama 's physician Amche Champa [Tib. བྱམས་པ] who was from Lhoka were in league and that they had given wrong medicines [Tib. སྨན་ལོག] to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a>'s medium could not have given hi that. It must have been the deity himself.   

**A:**  Anyway, it was said that the Dalai Lama was given the wrong drugs by the oracle although the oracle could not have given the medicine. I don't know the truth, but such talk was circulating among the people. Then gradually the medium of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> was demoted and he and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la were shut in at Sharchenjok [Tib. shar chen jok] [prison]. The Doctor Champa and the favorite [Künphe la] were all sent into exile.   

**Q:**  He was called Dechen Yingsal [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་དབྱིངས་གསལ]. The reason given was as mentioned earlier, that is, for administering the wrong drugs to the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The reason for Kujar Kunpel la's banishment was that he made the people to have a hard time and he started the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> [Tib. གྲོང་དྲག] Regiment and did lot of hanky-panky and caused lot of trouble. Due to these reasons he was sent into exile.   

**Q:**  What is the real reason for framing the Kujar?   

**A:**  The real reason was that Kujar's father was a very aggressive and capable person. He was at the Jagdo [Tib. ལྕགས་རྡོ] Estate, which had been given to them on their request. This estate was given as a personal property to them. It is said that Kujar's father used to give unnecessary trouble to the people and he used to boast that he and his son were the real government in all but name. The peasants reported these incidents to the Government and this finally got Kujar banished. However, I personally feel that he was not an evil person. He has done much work - he constructed industries and an electric powerhouse at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and he had put up the fences at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and had done so many other things.   

**Q:**  You must have met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la later in India. What talks did you have with him?   

**A:**  I met him in India. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la had been banished to Kongpo. His father was sent to a different place. He was shut in the prison called Lhogyü [Tib. ལྷོ་རྒྱུད] near the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> in Lhasa.   

**A:**  When the soldiers were bringing Kujar from the Eastern side - another group of soldiers were bringing his father from the Southern side and they were made to meet right in front of the New Palace Phodrang Sarpa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ].  

**Q:**  Why did they do like this?   

**A:**  They did it on purpose because this palace was constructed for and by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la. So just to be spiteful they took the one down to Kongpo Chamnag [Tib. chab nnag] and the father up to Dowa [Tib. དོ་བ] Dzong and their paths were calculated to cross right near the Sabogang. Later w<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> happened to the father? He died. Most probably I think he died at the Dowa Dzong's prison. After that came Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] Gung and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s problem. How did Lungshar's problem start? People say that Lungshar practiced the art of black magic, but the real cause was that Lungshar wanted to introduce a democractic form of government because earlier he had gone to England and had seen the Western system of ruling the country. Therefore, he wished to introduce a change in the form of ruling the country (Tibet). Did Lungshar really want to introduce a democratic form of government or was it because he wanted to grab power for himself? These are the two possibilities. It is true that he went abroad and had seen a different form of running countries. He had visited and attended the schools there. On the other hand, when Lhalu, his son was about to be born, someone had told him that if the child was born in England then it would be born with European features. Lungshar thought that if his child is born with blonde hair, it would prove so embarrassing back home. Therefore, he left England in a hurry and even when he reached Mumbai he did not stop there but went up to Darjeeling where his son was finally delivered. You must take these two incidents into consideration. Then during the 13th Dalai Lama's reign Lungshar introduced a new taxation system called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབབ་གཞི] The land investigation of manorial estates that was devised and conducted by Lungshar in order to raise new tax revenue from these estates for the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s program of modernization, especially the expansion of the army.">babshi</a> [Tib. འབབ་ཞིབ] and this is one of the chief reasons why the Panchen Lama had to leave for China. Again on the other hand - people like Lhalu and his other relatives were also subjected to heavy taxation even though their estates were comparatively poorer. Later when certain estates were really burdened with heavy taxes then he showed leniency towards them. So such are the numerous incidents and we must take into consideration all these instances and then see if he really wanted to introduce democracy in Tibet or was he a power seeker aiming to become the Regent or Assistant Regent, the Prime Minister and the Assistant Prime MInister and so on. So we must find out his real motives. I think as you said that his motive was to bring democracy to Tibet and at the same time grab power for himself. His main ambition was to introduce democracy in Tibet and in the process improve his power status. Whoever the person may be - everyone has the strong feeling of "I, me." They may talk about equality for all human beings but the individual desires to be more equal than the others. To achieve ones ambition, one must have a method to make lot of other people happy. Therefore when one comes up with the idea of a democratic form of government everyone will think and say that he is thinking about the welfare of the masses and he has no selfish reasons. So, the idea of introducing democracy becomes a good ploy. Therefore, I think that Lungshar wanted to introduce democracy and he also wanted to gain power for himself. This sounds to be true. Before Lungshar got arrested how did his plan got stopped? The main reason that his plan got stopped was that he was accused of revolt [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ]. Janglojen was the one who wrote the documents [for he group] at that time. They accused Lungshar and his colleagues of forming a group and creating trouble. Hence Janglojen was accused of being the document writer and he was exiled to Kongpo. Then Lungshar himself was arrested. Who were the Lungshar's colleagues in that separate meetings [Tib. ཟུར་ཚོགས]? Janglojen, Gajang Tenpa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ], Tsidrung Kongtruk la [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྲུག་ལགས] and some others were with Lungshar. How did their plan leak out? I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was also one of them and later he thought that nothing good would come out of this plan, so he left the group. Owing to this, he had to flee and seek refuge at Drepung. After that, there was the problem of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> which I remember a little bit. Around that time the Guomindang delegation came to offer their condolences to the deceased Dalai Lama. Do you remember about it? Tell me whatever you remember and whatever you heard. Since the Dalai Lama went to India in 1912, there weren't any Chinese in Tibet, so how did they come? Yes. This I remember. Probably, they had been looking for a chance many times, but they didn't get the opportunity to come. Then they grabbed the Dalai Lama's death as an opportunity and they came to Tibet on the pretext of offeering condolences and making offerings for the deceased Dalai Lama. This was the idea of the Tibet-Mongolian Office [Tib. བོད་སོག་ལས་ཁུངས]. Actually the Chinese had been watching closely for such an opportunity. So, when the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, they came on the pretext of offering condolences and making offerings but in reality it was to get a foothold in Tibet. At that time, was the Tibetan Bureau [Tib. དོན་གཅོད] already opened at Nanjing? I guess it was already there. The Khendrön Losum [Tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] was at Nanjing. Huang Musong was the first one to come to offer his condolences in Tibet. He came from Kham with many other officers [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]. The Government pitched tents below the new park to receive them. Then the Tibetan Government made arrangements for them at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] house. Also arrangements were made at various other houses such as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and Tsögo, etc., since there were so many of them. Some of them were accommodated in the Potala place. Most of the officers came in palanquins, which were later put up at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> compound. Since we were children, we went everywhere to look at them. The bearers of the palanquins were staying in Ragashag's compound smoking opium and cooking meat filled fried pancakes called shabaleb [Tib. ཤ་བག་ལེབ]. Later when they could not return home, they spent their time in Lhasa selling Shabaleb. Is this Shabaleb a Chinese dish? It must be delicious? Yes, it is. We children used to buy it. The palanquins were made out of Bamboo. They used to dismantle them and use them for firewood. We used to buy pieces of bamboo so as to make pens out of them. Then some of them were sent back and gradually they decreased in number. Some of them stayed behind as barbers and hairdressers and finally settled down in Lhasa. Then Huang Musong along with their junior officers went and visited the Potala and other holy shrines. Huang Musong was a handsome and smooth person. Then when Huang left, few new officers came to replace him. I heard that he was a military general and there were lot of discussions in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> whether Huang Musong should be permitted to come to Tibet or not. Did you hear about this? A discussion must have taken place, but I didn't hear anything specific about it. Later a few new officers came to replace him like Jiang Ziying or something. It was must be the director, Shen Chuzhang [Ch. qu zhang]. Yes, there was also Shen Chuzhang and some other officers. Anyway, since then the Chinese continued to stay in Tibet and I heard that one of them would ride a horse and go to the river side every morning and stay there for a long time and some say that he would listen to the sound of the water. One day, he fell down from the horse and got a stroke and died. The Chinese built a house like a stupa as a cemetery stone just near the place where he fell. After that, Jiang Ziying, a short guy who spoke fluent English came and they had a half-Chinese interpreter who came from Kalimpong called Awala or something. His mother was Tibetan and his father was Chinese. He knew Nepalese and also English. Anyway, the Chinese continued to stay in Lhasa, right? Yes. Their office was at Kyitöpa which they called the Tibet-Mongolian Office. Did they call that name for their office in Lhasa? Probably, they had connection with that office. They didn't call the office in Lhasa Tibet-Mongolian, right? They called it Kyitöpa. They might have a name for the office? Yes, probably. There they opened their own school. At that time, it was the time of the Regent Reting who went to the holy lake Lhamö Lamtso [Tib. ལྷ་མོའོ་བླ་མཚོ]. Then do you remember about Trimön's resignation? Yes. At that time what were the people saying? There was lot of different talk going on about him. I don't recollect them now. At that time there was a popular street song about Trimön. Didn't it say, "If you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> do not control yourself when you go too high, what would be the use of wearing the white lower garment and hovering around." [Tib. མི་རྗེ་ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ། མཐོ་པོའི་མཐོ་ཚོད་མ་བཟུང་ན། ཤམ་ཐབ་དཀར་པོ་མཆོད་ནས། ལྡིང་སྐོར་སྐྱོན་ནས་གང་ཡོང]? That was the song. [laughs] At the time of the Lungshar, there was also a song with the wording, "Lungshar stayed in retreat saying that he is a Lama and gave two of his eyeballs as alms saying that he is Drimekunden." [Tib. ལུང་ཤར་བླ་མ་ཡིན་ཟེར། སྐུ་མཚམས་བསྡམས་ནས་བཞུགས་བཞག། དྲི་མེད་ཀུན་ལྡན་ཡིན་ཟེར། སྤྱན་གཉིས་སྦྱིན་པར་བཏང་སོང] [laughs] I don't remember this. At one time, he behaved kind of insane and even stayed at the stupa Bago Kaling [Tib. བྲག་སྒོ་ཀར་ནེ] after he resigned from the governmnet service and then he wore the white lower garment. Didn't he even wear the hat called Ugyen Pesha [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་པད་ཞྭ]? Yes, he did a lot of things. At that time his wife was the Derge Queen [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་བཙུན་མོ] and he stayed in a house in Bara Lubug [Tib. བྲག་ལྷ་ཀླུ་སྒུག] that belonged to the Tibetan Medical Astrological Institute, the Mentsikhang [Tib. སྨན་རྩིས་ཁང]. I heard that he would hang around with the tutor to the [lama] Dechen Chönkhor [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. When did Trimön die? I don't know. When Trimön pretended to be slightly crazy was it before he resigned from the shape position or after it? It was just before he resigned. Due to this he asked permission to be relieved off his rank as well as all the responsibilities and it was granted. I think this was a calculated move. There are two versions to this. According to one version, Trimön had ambitions to climb up the power structure. Therefore, he thought that if he asked for permission to be allowed to resign, the regent might say that you are indispensable at this time and I would feel more confident if you are in the Kashag. When he asked for the resignation, Reting told him, "If you leave the Kashag then I will also resign from the Regentship." In such a situation, he hoped that he would be promoted as an Assistant Prime Minister since Langdun the Prime Minister was very young. However, his plan misfired when they granted him permission to resign. The other version is that, Trimön genuinely wanted to resign. So he thought that if acted crazy they would let him go. I think that he put on an act of hoping that this would get him permission to resign. However, it is difficult to be certain. As you said there are two versions to it. Who did you talk about this? Tsatrül [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ] Rinpoche told me this. According to him Trimön genuinely wanted to resign and he acted crazy hoping this would enable him to get permission. When there was a lot of trouble, it might have been complicated to remain as a shape. Actually, it was the time when there was no trouble [Note: as he had already eliminated Lungshar]. After he accomplished the work for building the stupa for keeping the remain of the Dalai Lama, I think he resigned. So I also think that he might have thought that he would get a promotion to the Prime Minister for building the stupa. He might have thought that if he would ask to resignation, Reting will appoint him as his assistant. But he got resigned for good. Then there was lot of problem about Panchen Lama returning to Tibet. Can you tell me something about it? On that occasion there were two factions - one wanted him to come back and the others did not. Who were the people who didn't like the government and wanted him to come back? It is hard to say. Then who among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> wanted him to come back? I think the majority of the kudrak wanted him to come back. Then what happened? Along with the Panchen Lama there were lot of Chinese soldiers. This was planned by the Guomindang. The Tibetan Government said that the Panchen Lama is most welcome to return provided he does not bring this large number of Chinese soldiers. This was planned by the Guomindang. The Tibetan Government said that the Panchen Lama is most welcome to return provided he does not bring his large number of Chinese escorts. How many Chinese Bodyguards were with them? Most probably, there were about 1000 soldiers. No impossible. A few days back I spoke with Phapongka's [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and he told me that there were only about 100 soldiers. Later after the Panchen Lama's death, his bodyguards' chubas were given as uniforms to the Lhasa police. Who gave them these chubas? The Tibetan Government gave it to them. A lot of Panchen Lama's articles came into the Government's hand. The Kaki chuba uniforms of the Lhasa police force are said to be the property of the late Panchen Lama's Chinese escorts. After the Panchen Lama's deat, most of his property was probably confiscated by the Tibetan Government? Yes. Most of them found their way into the Government's hand. However, lot of them got lost while they were being brought to Lhasa. I heard there a lot of correspondence and people were going up and down. How did that happen? I don't have anything certain to tell you. After the Panchen Lama's death, they could not bring up the things and many of them might have been lost also. Didn't the government buy them? I don't think so. How could that be. It was just robbed because the Tibetan Government would rob a lot, right?   

**Q:**  Later what happened to the father?   

**A:**  He died. Most probably I think he died at the Dowa Dzong's prison. After that came Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] Gung and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s problem.   

**Q:**  How did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s problem start?   

**A:**  People say that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> practiced the art of black magic, but the real cause was that Lungshar wanted to introduce a democractic form of government because earlier he had gone to England and had seen the Western system of ruling the country. Therefore, he wished to introduce a change in the form of ruling the country (Tibet).   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> really want to introduce a democratic form of government or was it because he wanted to grab power for himself? These are the two possibilities. It is true that he went abroad and had seen a different form of running countries. He had visited and attended the schools there. On the other hand, when Lhalu, his son was about to be born, someone had told him that if the child was born in England then it would be born with European features. Lungshar thought that if his child is born with blonde hair, it would prove so embarrassing back home. Therefore, he left England in a hurry and even when he reached Mumbai he did not stop there but went up to Darjeeling where his son was finally delivered. You must take these two incidents into consideration. Then during the 13th Dalai Lama's reign Lungshar introduced a new taxation system called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབབ་གཞི] The land investigation of manorial estates that was devised and conducted by Lungshar in order to raise new tax revenue from these estates for the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s program of modernization, especially the expansion of the army.">babshi</a> [Tib. འབབ་ཞིབ] and this is one of the chief reasons why the Panchen Lama had to leave for China. Again on the other hand - people like Lhalu and his other relatives were also subjected to heavy taxation even though their estates were comparatively poorer. Later when certain estates were really burdened with heavy taxes then he showed leniency towards them. So such are the numerous incidents and we must take into consideration all these instances and then see if he really wanted to introduce democracy in Tibet or was he a power seeker aiming to become the Regent or Assistant Regent, the Prime Minister and the Assistant Prime MInister and so on. So we must find out his real motives.   

**A:**  I think as you said that his motive was to bring democracy to Tibet and at the same time grab power for himself. His main ambition was to introduce democracy in Tibet and in the process improve his power status. Whoever the person may be - everyone has the strong feeling of "I, me." They may talk about equality for all human beings but the individual desires to be more equal than the others. To achieve ones ambition, one must have a method to make lot of other people happy. Therefore when one comes up with the idea of a democratic form of government everyone will think and say that he is thinking about the welfare of the masses and he has no selfish reasons. So, the idea of introducing democracy becomes a good ploy. Therefore, I think that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> wanted to introduce democracy and he also wanted to gain power for himself.   

**Q:**  This sounds to be true. Before <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> got arrested how did his plan got stopped?   

**A:**  The main reason that his plan got stopped was that he was accused of revolt [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ]. Janglojen was the one who wrote the documents [for he group] at that time. They accused <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and his colleagues of forming a group and creating trouble. Hence Janglojen was accused of being the document writer and he was exiled to Kongpo. Then Lungshar himself was arrested.   

**Q:**  Who were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s colleagues in that separate meetings [Tib. ཟུར་ཚོགས]?   

**A:**  Janglojen, Gajang Tenpa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ], Tsidrung Kongtruk la [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྲུག་ལགས] and some others were with Lungshar.   

**Q:**  How did their plan leak out?   

**A:**  I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was also one of them and later he thought that nothing good would come out of this plan, so he left the group. Owing to this, he had to flee and seek refuge at Drepung. After that, there was the problem of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> which I remember a little bit.   

**Q:**  Around that time the Guomindang delegation came to offer their condolences to the deceased Dalai Lama. Do you remember about it? Tell me whatever you remember and whatever you heard. Since the Dalai Lama went to India in 1912, there weren't any Chinese in Tibet, so how did they come?   

**A:**  Yes. This I remember. Probably, they had been looking for a chance many times, but they didn't get the opportunity to come. Then they grabbed the Dalai Lama's death as an opportunity and they came to Tibet on the pretext of offeering condolences and making offerings for the deceased Dalai Lama. This was the idea of the Tibet-Mongolian Office [Tib. བོད་སོག་ལས་ཁུངས]. Actually the Chinese had been watching closely for such an opportunity. So, when the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, they came on the pretext of offering condolences and making offerings but in reality it was to get a foothold in Tibet.   

**Q:**  At that time, was the Tibetan Bureau [Tib. དོན་གཅོད] already opened at Nanjing?   

**A:**  I guess it was already there. The Khendrön Losum [Tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] was at Nanjing. Huang Musong was the first one to come to offer his condolences in Tibet. He came from Kham with many other officers [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]. The Government pitched tents below the new park to receive them. Then the Tibetan Government made arrangements for them at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] house. Also arrangements were made at various other houses such as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and Tsögo, etc., since there were so many of them. Some of them were accommodated in the Potala place. Most of the officers came in palanquins, which were later put up at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> compound. Since we were children, we went everywhere to look at them. The bearers of the palanquins were staying in Ragashag's compound smoking opium and cooking meat filled fried pancakes called shabaleb [Tib. ཤ་བག་ལེབ]. Later when they could not return home, they spent their time in Lhasa selling Shabaleb.   

**Q:** Is this Shabaleb a Chinese dish? It must be delicious?   

**A:**  Yes, it is. We children used to buy it. The palanquins were made out of Bamboo. They used to dismantle them and use them for firewood. We used to buy pieces of bamboo so as to make pens out of them. Then some of them were sent back and gradually they decreased in number. Some of them stayed behind as barbers and hairdressers and finally settled down in Lhasa. Then Huang Musong along with their junior officers went and visited the Potala and other holy shrines. Huang Musong was a handsome and smooth person. Then when Huang left, few new officers came to replace him.   

**Q:**  I heard that he was a military general and there were lot of discussions in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> whether Huang Musong should be permitted to come to Tibet or not. Did you hear about this?   

**A:**  A discussion must have taken place, but I didn't hear anything specific about it. Later a few new officers came to replace him like Jiang Ziying or something.   

**Q:**  It was must be the director, Shen Chuzhang [Ch. qu zhang].   

**A:**  Yes, there was also Shen Chuzhang and some other officers. Anyway, since then the Chinese continued to stay in Tibet and I heard that one of them would ride a horse and go to the river side every morning and stay there for a long time and some say that he would listen to the sound of the water. One day, he fell down from the horse and got a stroke and died. The Chinese built a house like a stupa as a cemetery stone just near the place where he fell. After that, Jiang Ziying, a short guy who spoke fluent English came and they had a half-Chinese interpreter who came from Kalimpong called Awala or something. His mother was Tibetan and his father was Chinese. He knew Nepalese and also English.   

**Q:**  Anyway, the Chinese continued to stay in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Their office was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> which they called the Tibet-Mongolian Office.   

**Q:**  Did they call that name for their office in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Probably, they had connection with that office.   

**Q:**  They didn't call the office in Lhasa Tibet-Mongolian, right?   

**A:**  They called it Kyitöpa.   

**Q:**  They might have a name for the office?   

**A:**  Yes, probably. There they opened their own school.   

**Q:**  At that time, it was the time of the Regent Reting who went to the holy lake Lhamö Lamtso [Tib. ལྷ་མོའོ་བླ་མཚོ]. Then do you remember about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s resignation?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time what were the people saying?   

**A:**  There was lot of different talk going on about him. I don't recollect them now. At that time there was a popular street song about Trimön.   

**Q:**  Didn't it say, "If you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> do not control yourself when you go too high, what would be the use of wearing the white lower garment and hovering around." [Tib. མི་རྗེ་ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ། མཐོ་པོའི་མཐོ་ཚོད་མ་བཟུང་ན། ཤམ་ཐབ་དཀར་པོ་མཆོད་ནས། ལྡིང་སྐོར་སྐྱོན་ནས་གང་ཡོང]?   

**A:**  That was the song. [laughs] At the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, there was also a song with the wording, "Lungshar stayed in retreat saying that he is a Lama and gave two of his eyeballs as alms saying that he is Drimekunden." [Tib. ལུང་ཤར་བླ་མ་ཡིན་ཟེར། སྐུ་མཚམས་བསྡམས་ནས་བཞུགས་བཞག། དྲི་མེད་ཀུན་ལྡན་ཡིན་ཟེར། སྤྱན་གཉིས་སྦྱིན་པར་བཏང་སོང] [laughs]   

**A:**  I don't remember this. At one time, he behaved kind of insane and even stayed at the stupa Bago Kaling [Tib. བྲག་སྒོ་ཀར་ནེ] after he resigned from the governmnet service and then he wore the white lower garment.   

**Q:**  Didn't he even wear the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> called Ugyen Pesha [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་པད་ཞྭ]?   

**A:**  Yes, he did a lot of things. At that time his wife was the Derge Queen [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་བཙུན་མོ] and he stayed in a house in Bara Lubug [Tib. བྲག་ལྷ་ཀླུ་སྒུག] that belonged to the Tibetan Medical Astrological Institute, the Mentsikhang [Tib. སྨན་རྩིས་ཁང].   

**Q:**  I heard that he would hang around with the tutor to the [lama] Dechen Chönkhor [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. When did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> die?   

**Q:**  I don't know. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> pretended to be slightly crazy was it before he resigned from the shape position or after it?   

**A:**  It was just before he resigned. Due to this he asked permission to be relieved off his rank as well as all the responsibilities and it was granted. I think this was a calculated move.   

**Q:**  There are two versions to this. According to one version, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had ambitions to climb up the power structure. Therefore, he thought that if he asked for permission to be allowed to resign, the regent might say that you are indispensable at this time and I would feel more confident if you are in the Kashag. When he asked for the resignation, Reting told him, "If you leave the Kashag then I will also resign from the Regentship." In such a situation, he hoped that he would be promoted as an Assistant Prime Minister since Langdun the Prime Minister was very young. However, his plan misfired when they granted him permission to resign. The other version is that, Trimön genuinely wanted to resign. So he thought that if acted crazy they would let him go.   

**A:**  I think that he put on an act of hoping that this would get him permission to resign. However, it is difficult to be certain. As you said there are two versions to it.   

**Q:**  Who did you talk about this?   

**A:**  Tsatrül [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ] Rinpoche told me this. According to him <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> genuinely wanted to resign and he acted crazy hoping this would enable him to get permission. When there was a lot of trouble, it might have been complicated to remain as a shape.   

**Q:**  Actually, it was the time when there was no trouble [Note: as he had already eliminated Lungshar].   

**A:**  After he accomplished the work for building the stupa for keeping the remain of the Dalai Lama, I think he resigned. So I also think that he might have thought that he would get a promotion to the Prime Minister for building the stupa. He might have thought that if he would ask to resignation, Reting will appoint him as his assistant. But he got resigned for good.   

**Q:**  Then there was lot of problem about Panchen Lama returning to Tibet. Can you tell me something about it?   

**A:**  On that occasion there were two factions - one wanted him to come back and the others did not.   

**Q:**  Who were the people who didn't like the government and wanted him to come back?   

**A:**  It is hard to say.   

**Q:**  Then who among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> wanted him to come back?   

**A:**  I think the majority of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> wanted him to come back.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  Along with the Panchen Lama there were lot of Chinese soldiers. This was planned by the Guomindang. The Tibetan Government said that the Panchen Lama is most welcome to return provided he does not bring this large number of Chinese soldiers. This was planned by the Guomindang. The Tibetan Government said that the Panchen Lama is most welcome to return provided he does not bring his large number of Chinese escorts.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese Bodyguards were with them?  

**A:**  Most probably, there were about 1000 soldiers.  

**Q:**  No impossible. A few days back I spoke with Phapongka's [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and he told me that there were only about 100 soldiers.   

**A:**  Later after the Panchen Lama's death, his bodyguards' chubas were given as uniforms to the Lhasa police.   

**Q:**  Who gave them these chubas?   

**A:**  The Tibetan Government gave it to them. A lot of Panchen Lama's articles came into the Government's hand. The Kaki chuba uniforms of the Lhasa police force are said to be the property of the late Panchen Lama's Chinese escorts.   

**Q:**  After the Panchen Lama's deat, most of his property was probably confiscated by the Tibetan Government?   

**A:**  Yes. Most of them found their way into the Government's hand. However, lot of them got lost while they were being brought to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I heard there a lot of correspondence and people were going up and down. How did that happen?   

**A:**  I don't have anything certain to tell you. After the Panchen Lama's death, they could not bring up the things and many of them might have been lost also.   

**Q:**  Didn't the government buy them?   

**A:**  I don't think so. How could that be.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  Yes. Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> of Tashilunpo who wanted the Panchen Lama to come to Tashilunpo most strong in this were Trenthong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] and Lhamön Yeshi Tsultrim [Tib. ལྷ་སྨོན་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] and their faction. They did not like the government. Later they supported the Chinese because they still held a grudge against the government.   

**Q:**  What was the grudge?  

**A:**  Previously the Panchen Lama had to flee from Tibet. Whatever the cause may be, the Panchen Lama had to flee and later again they stopped him from returning because of his Chinese escorts. Therefore, they did not like the government.   

**Q:**  Then the Panchen Lama died in Rashi Lungshö Monastery and then in 1936, the Communist "Long March" took place. They reached Litang and the Hor area. At that time the two Doji (Governors) were Lopal [Tib. བློ་དཔལ] and Sursur Dzasa [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར་རྫ་ས]. During the 'Long March do you remember when the communists first came to Kham?   

**A:**  During the first march, they came up to Batang and from there they went back.   

**Q:**  Then do you remember when the Germans came to Tibet?   

**A:**  There were 5 people along with Dr. Schaefer. When they arrived in Lhasa the arrangements were made by Trelde Linga [Tib. འཕྲལ་བདེ་གླིང་ག] and the guide was one of the clerks in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung [Tib. ཞོལ་དྲུང] who used to stay in Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང]. He was promoted to the position of Drungtog [Tib. དྲུང་གཏོགས]. They had come to study the antique articles and fossils and they collected dead crows for research and they also tried to catch live animals if they could and take them away. They were hunting for such items. Then they said that their real origin was from Lhoka. At Lhoka they had found an old flag with a Swastika on it at one of the old families. The Swastika is a symbol of the Germans. I think the flag must have been a relic of the old Bon religion. Their real interest was in the structure of the old stones and the geographical layout of the land. They also collected lot of old fossils. So you see they carried on lot of studies in Lhoka and when they returned to Lhasa, it coincided with the Mönlam Exorcism [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག]. They took photos of the throwing away of the sacrificial <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> and then the monks stoned them and they had to flee. When they stoned them, the guide protected them. Then they were brought to the house called Nordzin Gyentsen [Tib. ནོར་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. Then they told the government that the clerk saved them from thestoning. So he got the Drungtog title.   

