# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0002.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 79  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] was a Kalön and also the Governor-General of Chamdo (the Doji) in 1950. In this interview, he discusses the implementation of Chinese political reforms in Lhasa in the 1950s. He discusses how many people thought that it would be best to implement the 17-Point Agreement only gradually, and the people’s (Tib, mimmang) views of the Kashag. He describes the Chinese's attempt to form a Military Administrative Committee and the rise of the People’s Association, while also describing the petition sent by the People’s Association to the Chinese. Finally, he discusses some of the various meetings held by government officials, including one in Norbulinga during the time of the uprising in 1959.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0002_01/H_0002_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Would you please tell us the main events that happened from 1951-1959 and the work relations between the Kashag and the Chinese? Also, who was in the Kashag and what were they thinking in the end of 1951 when you returned to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I returned in 1951.   

**Q:**  Please advise me what was important then.  

**A:**  Before that, I went to Chamdo and before the 17-Point Agreement was signed, I had to stay for awhile in Kongpo Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ]. After the Agreement was signed, I returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was there any reason for you to go back [to Lhasa]?   

**A:**  Since the Agreement was signed, there was no need to stay there [in Giamda].   

**Q:**  If they didn't sign the Agreement, were you supposed to stop the Chinese?   

**A:**  I was just supposed to stay there, though we would not have been able to stop them. It was good that the Agreement was signed and I came back. After I reached Lhasa, the People's Liberation Army arrived in Tibet. In the beginning, the People's Liberation Army's discipline was good and the national unity was done very well. They paid for everything, and they were unlike the Guomindang troops and did not rob things. At this time, some people in Lhasa who were not well-educated [Tib. ཆུ་ཚད] were provoking and pushing the People's Liberation Army troops, but they didn't respond, although they could have handled them. They were very well-behaved. Since they didn't respond back to them, there wasn't any trouble. There was also the public opinion which said that these People's Liberation Army soldiers were different from the Guomindang of the past. This must be a new Chinese, because in the past, the Tibetans had confronted the Chinese often.   

**Q:**  This was in 1951, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you arrived inat Lhasa, had the Dalai Lama come from Yadong?   

**A:**  When I arrived in Lhasa, the Dalai Lama had not yet arrived.   

**Q:**  Was it summer then?   

**A:**  Just after the 17-Point Agreement was signed, I came to Lhasa. At this time, there were no real kalön in the Kashag in Lhasa, as they were all in Yadong, but there were two Katsab, the lay official Shenkawa [Tib. ཤན་ཁ་བ] and the monk official Thubden Ramyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས]. The two sitsab called me to Lhasa saying there was a lot of work to do, like bringing back the Dalai Lama, and we also had to get prepared for the People's Liberation Army coming up [to Lhasa] since the Agreement was signed.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, what was the opinion of the Kashag about how to treat the Chinese military officers? Were they in favor of being friendly or [in favor of] opposing them? This was because there was a lot of trouble with the two sitsab.   

**A:**  In the beginning, we didn't have a wide range of opinions because the Agreement was already signed. The view of the Kashag was slightly calm and was to make good relations with them. We were defeated and we couldn't handle the People's Liberation Army. But the sitsab above us had a different opinion and they were slightly tough and militant [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ] even though there wasn't anything to be tough about because the Agreement was signed, but in the way of talking with the Chinese, their attitude was not good. For example, after Chamdo was liberated, all [some of] the Tibetan regiments were scattered (deactivated), and the military officers, therefore, had a hard time because there were no soldiers. So the Chinese suggested that these military officers attend school [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང] and make them work, and they [the CHinese] would pay their salary so that they could make a livelihood in the future. If they were just left there, they wouldn't have had anything to do because the regiments were gone. But Lukhangwa said, "Such study will not work out because in Chamdo you hit us in the head. So there is no way now to have studies." After Lukhangwa said this, of course, the Chinese were agitated and the talk became adversarial between the two sides.   

**Q:**  I don't know the system of the Tibetan government well. For example, when the sitsab planned to present a bad attitude, did they have to discuss this with the Kashag or the Yigtsang?   

**A:**  Actually, when they meet, the sitsab were on the top and the Kashag discussed things with the Chinese officers. They didn't need to discuss things with the Yigtsang. But Lukhangwa was very thoughtless [Tib. ཏོ་རོ་མོ་རོ] and he would not think much, and he was saying some things right away, spontaneously as soon as something happened. So one day, I also had a little problem because of this attitude. After I came up [to Lhasa], I told Lukhangwa, "If all of a sudden you say reckless things at the meetings, this is a little bit dangerous because it is inconvenient for us to agree with you. But when we keep quiet, it implies that only you have said that. So this is not good. In the future, you shouldn't do that. Whatever we have to say, first we should discuss it. And if we do something wrong, you can just scold us. If you do something wrong, we can share with you our comments. If we discuss things and then talk to them, this would be good." I was young then, and I didn't think much of the consequences and just said it.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was 37 years old then.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  Now I am 80 according to the Tibetan way of counting the years.   

**Q:**  You look very young.   

**A:**  At that time, I thought that it would be good and I said that in a sincere way, but Lukhangwa got angry at this and responded, "This will not do. I am an Amdo man." This means someone who speaks directly without thinking much. At that time, he got agitated with me because he did not like to be criticized. He might have thought I was saying something bad to him. We used to be friendly since we were both tsipön officials. After I came up [to Lhasa], he was higher in position, but we didn't have any contradictions. But we had the contradiction because of one word. This was dangerous.   

**Q:**  What did Lobsang Tashi say?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything. He couldn't say anything. He just sat there.   

**Q:**  Who was the more powerful of the two?   

**A:**  Their authority was the same, but Lukhangwa was more powerful and he would come out and speak the most. Lobsang Tashi was a little bit clever. Lukhangwa hadn't seen many things widely. This was his main fault, and because of this, there were severe contradictions which caused a lot of problems.   

**Q:**  After Zhang Jingwu arrived in Tibet, is it correct that the Kashag didn't hold discussions with him on every issue?   

**A:**  At that time, we held discussions on all the important matters with Zhang Jingwu.   

**Q:**  Just after Zhang Jingwu's arrival, what did he say about the first and the second point of the 17-Point Agreement? Whether [or not] it should be confirmed and about the soldiers and so on?   

**A:**  What he said was that Tibet had to put the Agreement into practice. But later he didn't stress that strongly, because they saw that it would be beneficial to do these things slowly. He used to say this, but he didn't get involved much in the Kashag's internal affairs. He also didn't give us orders saying that we had to do this or that. If there was a big issue, he would discuss it with us and then we would report to the Dalai Lama. At that time, it was okay.   

**Q:**  What were the big issues at this time?   

**A:**  There weren't any big issues other than organizing people and the way of doing the study as I mentioned above. They were not meddling in the affairs of the officials. Lukhangwa then said we would not do the study, so it was left like that.   

**Q:**  The study means school, right?   

**A:**  No. The study was to hold meetings and talk about politics, like how to realize the 17-Point Agreement and how to accept it. At that time, the people below didn't know about the Agreement.   

**Q:**  I heard that when Zhang Jingwu first gave Lukhangwa a copy of the Agreement and told him that it was good that the Agreement had been signed, Lukhangwa said, "I don't know about the Agreement until Ngabö comes with the original. I am not going to talk about the implementation of the Agreement because I haven't seen the original Agreement." Then they held a Full Assembly meeting, and Ngabö and Sambo all came. Is this true?   

**A:**  He probably said that to Zhang Jingwu at a meeting they had. But it was not said when all the kalön were together. Lukhangwa said things right away without thinking much.   

**Q:**  I don't understand his plan. As foreigners look at it, he should have had a long-term plan and it should have been a secret whether they wanted to be friendly or oppose, and what should be done in the future. But I think he didn't have that.   

**A:**  In principle, he was very conservative and he liked the old society and was not interested in changes to it or developing it. This was his fault. So whatever people told him, it was hard for him to accept it.   

**Q:**  He thought of keeping Tibet as before, right?   

**A:**  I think he probably had that thought. As for the Kashag, even if they had that kind of thought, they would not dare to do that work.   

**Q:**  When the sitsab and the Kashag met, did Lukhangwa say that the new society was not good?   

**A:**  He didn't accept new things and didn't talk much. When the meetings were held, he would say that right away, but he wouldn't say much to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  What were Shenkawa and Thubden Ramyang thinking?   

**A:**  Shenkawa and those people were calm ( tranquil/ esay-going) [Tib. ལྷིང་པོ]. They sort of liked to have friendly relations with the Chinese, but when the revolt took place, they didn't have any choice but to go along when all the people went. Of the two, Shenkawa was more clever and said a little more. Thubden Ramyang didn't say much. Shenkawa used to say, "If we show our full face, they will also show their full face, and if we show them half of our face, they will also show half." This meant that if we had a good attitude with the Chinese, in turn, they would also show us a good attitude. Otherwise, they wouldn't be good. He used to always say this. So he wanted to have good relations with the Chinese, but during the revolt he had to join in with the others. The others [kalön] didn't do bad things to the government, but they could see the society and thought that it would be beneficial to have a good relations. Shenkawa would put some effort into this. But we couldn't handle them [sitsab] because the positions were different. Lobsang Tashi was more clever than Lukhangwa, but if Lukhangwa asked him, "Isn't it like this?" He would reply yes [support him] whether he thought it was or not.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, the Tibetan government kind of accepted the Agreement and you held a meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. Although the Agreement was signed, Lukhangwa mainly openly opposed the Agreement. And some aristocrats neither opposed it nor said it should be respected, but simply behaved kind of unclear [Tib. ཟ་རི་ཟི་རི]. Therefore, after Ngabö came up [to Lhasa], he asked the Kashag whether they were going to implement it or not. The Kashag couldn't say no and it was okay, but they couldn't make the decision and that they should just tell the Tsondu Assembly. Since the tsondu then was held, other people didn't have the power. So a meeting was held and Ngabö said that he was going to the tsondu meeting with the people who signed the Agreement.   

**Q:**  Usually the kalön would not attend tsondu meetings, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but for this one he did.   

**Q:**  Did the other kalön go?   

**A:**  No, only him. The Kashag's responsibility is to receive and listen to the report of the tsondu.   

**Q:**  What was the report of the tsondu?   

**A:**  The report was that the Agreement was good. It was acceptable.   

**Q:**  Who were the kalön then?   

**A:**  There were Ramba, Ragashag and Surkhang, and there were many since thee were both full and the acting kalön there. At that time, there were many full and acting kalön.   

**Q:**  Surkhang wasn't there, was he?   

**A:**  Yes, he came back from Gyantse. I was also there. Shashur and Thubden Ramyang were there.   

**Q:**  Was there any dispute among the kalön?   

**A:**  No. Even if there was, no one would say things openly and directly like Lukhangwa did. While I was the kalön, we never had an argument.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag meet daily?   

**A:**  Yes it did, except for Saturdays.   

**Q:**  What time did it start?   

**A:**  A little before 11. It ended about 5 p.m. If there was a lot of work we stayed until dark. We stayed there until noon and they served some food in a bowl. Not a real meal.   

**Q:**  I heard that Zhang Jingwu said, "The Agreement is accepted. We should implement the Agreement and set up the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]," and they discussed this and they had a severe disagreement.   

**A:**  When I was there, there was no big dispute over this. Lukhangwa and the Chinese had a fight. There were some talks about people going to China and so on. But since Lukhangwa had the bad relations from the beginning, there were many contradictions on many occasions. For example, at that time, there was no motorable road, so the People's Liberation Army had to buy grain in Lhasa because otherwise it won't fall from the sky. So the Chinese wanted us to sell grain. If we didn't sell them grain, they would be left hungry. But Lukhangwa said reckless things.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He said, "We lost the war in Chamdo. But, is losing the war or being hungry worse?" . If you say that, people will be angry, right? So while two of them [the sitsab] were there, we couldn't do the work well. Actually, selling grain was to implement the Agreement because one of the points in it was about selling grain.   

**Q:**  What happened with the grain? Didn't the government sell grain?   

**A:**  Later the government sold grain and the private people sold a little bit of grain to the Chinese. But the private people didn't dare sell much to the Chinese because of Lukhangwa's attitude as he was powerful. They didn't discuss the Military Administrative Committee right away and then Lukhangwa was soon finished.   

**Q:**  I heard that the government openly said that they would support grain, but secretly sent letters and told the dzongpön not to sell much grain. Therefore, the People's Liberation Army had a very hard time in the beginning. Is this true?   

**A:**  The government collectively never sent such letters secretly to the dzong, and they couldn't have sent them. I know that. But whether a few people sent private letters, I do not know. Later we told them to sell the grain and we supported them. When I was there, they didn't say that [not to sell grain]. But for issues like this, we didn't need to have all the kalön present. So I don't know whether the letter was sent by a few kalön. When the Kashag met with four people, if the issue was important, the four should meet. But if it wasn't a big issue, if only three were present, then they could settle it. While I was in the Kashag, we only sent letters saying to sell grain, and never said not to sell. So the idea of the Kashag was to sell grain. Soon after that, Lukhangwa had to resign.   

**Q:**  When did they discuss the Military Administrative Committee, and about the soldiers and the flags?   

**A:**  In 1954, when the National People's Congress [Tib. མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མེ་ཚོགས་ཆེན] was held, Surkhang and Ngabö went to attend the meeting and the Dalai Lama also went [to Beijing]. At that time, they confirmed those things.   

**Q:**  It was not confirmed, but the idea had come out and Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming submitted their opinions. I heard that not only Lukhangwa, but the People's Association also opposed it very srongly in 1952.   

**A:**  In 1951 there was a dispute over the flag, not on opening the [new] office. We had to carry the five star flag and the Tibetan soldiers were carrying the flag with the snow and lion. But later, the Tibetan army carried both flags, so the dispute was settled. During the time of the 2 sitsab, there was no discussion about starting the Military Administrative Committee. The People's Liberation Army had to tolerate a lot during this time. Finally they could no longer do it and get along well with the two of them, and the Dalai Lama had to get them to resign.   

**Q:**  How did the People's Association start?   

**A:**  It started in 1951. It was called that but it was really just a few people. They wrote all kinds of things recklessly, like opinions for opposing [the Chinese], and the Kashag received their petition. The Kashag said it wasn't okay for them to do that.   

**Q:**  How did you discuss this in the Kashag?   

**A:**  The Kashag had a discussion about this and decided not to accept the petition since there were all kinds of bad and reckless things in it, so there would be problems. We wanted to maintain good relations with the Chinese. So we refused and gave them back the petition. When we gave it back to them, they said, "We have reported this to the two sitsab, so please take it." We said that, "Since you have reported to the sitsab, we will take the petition, but we will ask the two sitsab." When we asked the 2 sitsab, they said, "They are submitting the petition and we didn't take it. But they said that they have reported this to the sitsab. What shall we do?" We called it the false [Tib. རྫུས་མ] People's Association, but Lukhangwa gave the order saying, "Since this is the opinion of the people, it doesn't matter if we give it to the People's Government and the People's Liberation Army. So give it to them [the Chinese]." I was a kalön then. So we gave it to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama consulted about this? Was there a custom of this?   

**A:**  Actually, the Dalai Lama should have been consulted internally, but we didn't do that. Lukhangwa settled it by saying give it to the Chinese. So the Kashag said yes, and went to the Chinese. The Dalai Lama was not involved in this because we would not report much to him and regularly, the sitsab would make the decisions.   

**Q:**  What was the content of the petition?   

**A:**  A lot of years have passed and I won't remember unless I read some books on that. Anyway, there wasn't anything good written in it.   

**Q:**  Did you give the petition to the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, we gave the People's Liberation Army the original petition.   

**Q:**  They gave it to you people and you people gave it to Zhang Jingwu, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Kashag went to give it.   

**Q:**  Zhang Jingwu was probably agitated, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was kind of agitated and he called the representatives in and took a photo [of them].   

**Q:**  Who were the representatives?   

**A:**  There were three of them and I knew one. He was in charge of the armory (Tib. gomdzö nyerba [གོ་མཛོད་གཉེར་པ]). The other two I didn't know. In their group, I knew two others, Kamikhang [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང] Chöndze and Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས]. I think the main ones were behind and the people who brought the petition were just regular members sent to submit the petition. The three met Zhang Jingwu and he didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  Did the representatives talk with Zhang Jingwu?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. Since the Kashag was there, they didn't even sit on the chairs and they only said, "This is what we want to say and we have written it in the petition." They just talked about the petition and didn't say anything else. So there wasn't any argument on that and the Chinese kept the petition. It was as if the sitsab made them do this.   

**Q:**  I heard that the two sitsab made it [the petition]? Is that true?   

**A:**  We were given that kind of order, so people would be suspicious. They said that they had reported it to the sitsab and asked them to please take it. When we took the petition to the sitsab, they didn't say whether the people had reported it to them before or not. They only said, "This is the people's opinions so give it to the Chinese." I think, however, that they had seen it in advance.   

**Q:**  That implies that they knew that, right?   

**A:**  It was like they knew or they didn't know.   

**Q:**  Did you read the petition?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  Was the petition long?   

**A:**  Yes. It was a long one written on Tibetan paper.   

**Q:**  Was it signed?   

**A:**  No. It was about 3-4 feet long. There was probably the name of the representative on the bottom. We read it quickly that day.   

**Q:**  Was the report signed?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't.   

**Q:**  What was the final settlement?   

**A:**  There was no settlement. The backer of the party appeared to be the sitsab. And at this time the contradiction became kind of obvious and it was said that the [situation] was not good. There was almost a big disturbance in Lhasa and they [the People's Association) did reckless things, and the People's Liberation Army had a hard time.   

**Q:**  What did they do?   

**A:**  Although they didn't openly rise up, they were going hither and thither and provoking the People's Liberation Army. They almost got into a fight. At this time, the People's Liberation Army gathered all together into a large group [for defense] and left some of the houses empty. One night, there was a danger of people coming to attack Zhang Jingwu's house, but nothing happened.   

**Q:**  I heard that that night two government officials, maybe Liushar, stayed with Zhang Jingwu, as they would be able to tell the masses to keep quiet if they caused trouble. Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes. It was me and Ngabö who went there and stayed. That night it was really dangerous and they didn't sleep because they had to remain . In the morning, no one attacked and we came back. The other side probably avoided this because this side was on alert. They might have planned to do something. They were suspicious [the Chinese]. All the kalön came and two of us stayed there.   

**Q:**  Did Zhang Jingwu tell you to stay there?   

**A:**  Yes, they told two of us to stay. If the masses did reckless things, we were to talk as go betweens and say not to act like that and go home. The two of us were also younger [kalön], so we stayed for one night.   

**Q:**  What did the Kashag think at this time? Did you think that the People's Association was doing useless things?   

**A:**  I don't know what all the kalön were thinking, but I thought that if they did that, it would be useless and there would not be a calm situation and there would be a danger of having a disturbance [Tib. ཟིང་ཆ]. The reason why I was afraid was that we knew the strength of the People's Liberation Army in Chamdo because we had challenged them. But we couldn't handle them and we just lost the war. We didn't want to do that again. As for the sitsab and those people, they didn't think in that way because some people were rising up [Tib. ལངས་ཡོང་གི་འདུག]. I don't know what they were up to, but they didn't do that openly. I don't know whether they did it secretly.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag members have a similar thought? For example, maintaining good relations with the Chinese and doing the reforms gradually? The sitsab had a different idea, namely to oppose the Chinese. How about in the Kashag?   

**A:**  In the Kashag it wasn't really like this and they didn't have the thought of causing a disturbance. If they would have done that, they would have set up a plan, but they didn't. But each individual would have different thoughts, right?   

**Q:**  We foreigners don't know the system of the Kashag. In the offices like the Kashag in foreign countries, when there is a major issue all the people would share their thoughts right away. If one said it was better to oppose, the other would say that it was useless to oppose because we lost the war in Chamdo. Did you have this kind of system in the Kashag?   

**A:**  It was mostly like this in the Kashag, but our thoughts were different. But most of them didn't say things openly. Shasur talked openly a little bit.   

**Q:**  Ngabö probably had the same thought as you?   

**A:**  Ngabö always wanted to be calm or tranquil.   

**Q:**  What were the others, like Surkhang and Ragashag, saying?   

**A:**  Verbally, they would say that we agree. They would not say much about whether it was good or bad.   

**Q:**  How was Thubden Ramyang?   

**A:**  He wasn't bad. If we said things he would say, yes, yes. I couldn't tell what Ragashag and Surkhang really deeply thought. And of these, Surkhang was not particularly easy to figure out. I was friendly with Surkhang when we were young. Regarding his outward manner and personal and inward feelings and thoughts, we couldn't handle him. I didn't know what he was thinking, but at that time, he never said the Chinese were no good at meetings. I couldn't tell what Surkhang thought because he is smart and he wouldn't show much in his appearance, but Shasur and Thubden Ramyang were regarded as straight forward people. I didn't have the courage to cause a disturbance and I thought that it would be better if there were no disturbances.   

**Q:**  When Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming had some matters to discuss, would they come to the Kashag or to the sitsab? What was the custom?   

**A:**  When they had important matters, they would report to the Kashag. After this, the sitsab and the kalön [Tib. སྲིད་བཀའ] would sit face to face on two sides of a long table and discuss it with the Zhongyang leaders and talk to each other.   

**Q:**  I heard people said reckless things when there were these joint meetings, and that the sitsab spoke and the kalön kept quiet. Is this true?   

**A:**  On common issues the kalön would speak. But when the sitsab would say something recklessly and the situation was tense, the kalön would stay quiet. This is where the danger was. We had a very hard time if we didn't keep quiet, because it would not be okay with [the sitsab] if we charged forward [Tib. མཆོངས] [saying things]. In such situations we kept quiet, and later I had to comment on that, saying if we charged forward together, it would not be good and if we didn't it wasn't good. So I suggested that we should discuss it well [first]. This was the principle for making the comment. But Lukhangwa didn't like it even though I was saying something good to him. We were old friends in the past, but after this, he was angry with me and we became at odds. Lukhangwa probably thought that my suggestion was because I was pro-Chinese. But at this time, since I was making my living in the old society, my brain [thought] was not good. I thought that if the Kashag could work well, then everyone would benefit.   

**Q:**  What was the view of Phala Drönyerchemmo?   

**A:**  He was not with us. In general, he didn't have a good brain [thoughts] and from the revolutionary point of view, he was said to not be good because of his attitude [tape ended].   

**Q:**  Phala had relations with Jenkhentsisum and America, and later he was kind of one of the main anti-Chinese persons.   

**A:**  Oh, I see, maybe. He didn't do that with us. We were not together. They might have done that in secret discussions, but I haven't met with him [Tib. ཚོགས་མ་མྱོང].   

**Q:**  Were the representatives of the People's Association arrested, or what happened to them?   

**A:**  The main ones, such as Kamikhang Chöndze and Thamjö Sonam, were arrested,.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for arresting them?   

**A:**  That was for submitting the petition.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag make that decision?   

**A:**  It was kind of done jointly. The Kashag and the Chinese jointky discussed about this and [the Kashag] arrested them. It was actually detention [Tib. བཀག་ཉར], not imprisonment.   

**Q:**  It was like house arrest [Tib. བཟང་བཙོན], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they leave them in their own homes?   

**A:**  No, but it was like house arrest because the issue was not settled and it became like [they were] opposing the Agreement which was just signed. This was not alright, so we had to hold them under house arrest because their talk was oppossed to the Agreement. Now they would be called counter-revolutionaries.   

**Q:**  How long were they held?   

**A:**  They were not held for a long time. Later, they were released, because some people had asked for this as a favor [Tib. ངོ་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  When you released them, who decided this, the Kashag or the Chinese Military Area Headquarters [Tib. དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང]?   

**A:**  The Military Headquarters mainly decided it because the Kashag wouldn't support them [People's Association], and they had to say yes to arrest them because they violated the law. So the Kashag didn't have anything to do. If they were to be released, some people [the Kashag] might have been in favor of releasing them. On the matter of releasing them, there weren't any different opinions.   

**Q:**  How many were arrested and who?   

**A:**  I know two of them, Kamikhang Chöndze and Thamjö Sonam. I don't know the others.   

**Q:**  At this time, some people said that the Dalai Lama issued an ordinance with his personal seal, the bugdam, all over Tibet saying the People's Association was not allowed?   

**A:**  Probably. If it was sealed with the bugdam, the Yigtsang would know and the Kashag would not know. Normally, when there was some document to be sealed with the bugdam in the Dalai Lama's name, the document would be consulted with the Dalai Lama and the seal would be used by the 4 Drunyichemmo.   

**Q:**  Would the Kashag comment on whether it was right or wrong?   

**A:**  The Kashag would not make any comment and whatever the Dalai Lama said would be done. If the ordinance with the bugdam was distributed, it should be there. I didn't hear about this clearly.   

**Q:**  Maybe what I heard was wrong. Otherwise, you would have known it because this is a big matter.   

**A:**  Maybe this was issued later on. I didn't work in the Kashag for a long time. In 1952, I was transferred to work in the overall office in charge of government grain.   

**Q:**  Was that after the two sitsab were demoted?   

**A:**  After the demotion of the two sitsab, there were comments made [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] against us [me] and I was transferred, but the [my] rank of the kalön was left as before.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were different thoughts on how the Agreement should be implemented and maybe Ngabö said in the Kashag that, "We should make our own hat and not wait for someone to put their hat [on us], as it won't fit as well. We should start the reforms by ourselves, otherwise, after a while, all the Chinese systems will be imposed on us." Did you hear this?   

**A:**  Probably, he might have said that, but I don't remember so clearly. Mainly in Lhasa, the Reform Office was set up.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  It was in 1953-54. This office was supposed to do the work [of reforms], but it was unable to work well. Ngabö was the main leader.   

**Q:**  Didn't they have discussions about how it would be better to implement the reform by ourselves in 1951-52?   

**A:**  I don't know about that clearly. I don't remember them saying that in the Kashag. When I was there and there were some other kalön, each of them would talk in the Kashag, right? Shasur used to say something that sounded good. He said, "If we show our full face to the Chinese, they will also show their full face, and if we show a half face, they will also show a half face." He was implying that we should take the initiative [Tib. རང་འགུལ], and he was mainly talking about making a good relation. If there was a good relationship, the work could be done gradually in a peaceful manner. Otherwise, it would become chaotic. The Reform Office did a little bit of reforms with loans and the organization of the dzongs, but I wasn't in that office so I don't know much.   

**Q:**  In 1951-52, was there any discussion regarding the faster or slower implementation of the Agreement, like in the Kashag, about how many soldiers coming would be good and how many would be bad?   

**A:**  When I was there, the 2 sitsab were mainly there. We didn't have any detailed discussions on that. But the Kashag said that we should implement the 17-Point Agreement slowly. That was our view. Since regarding the above, the 2 sitsab didn't accept much, we were doing [it] in that way [slowly]. But for some things, we had no choice but to put them it into practice, for example, like carrying flags when we would go to celebrate the Chinese holidays such as October 1st. If the Chinese said come to participate, we had no choice but to go. Otherwise, we didn't make any decisions to do this or that.   

**Q:**  Didn't they discuss the soldiers?   

**A:**  They didn't. They might have thought it, but were unable to do it openly. We couldn't have a good discussion because [the two sides] were confrontational right away.   

**Q:**  In 1952, Gyalo Thondup came to Lhasa. Did you meet him?   

**A:**  I met him.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He wouldn't say things clearly. He came on a vacation. At this time, in the Kashag, the kalön, like Shasur, hoped that he would stay in Lhasa and work among the local government officials. This was the only goal of the Kashag. To tell you the truth, he was young then, so they didn't do much, like meeting [with] him together. The hope was to give him a title in the Kashag and to make him become a local government official because we should respect him.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any plan to oppose the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't. At this time, we met him in our own houses. I met him in my house. We just asked how are you, told him to have food and [asked] how was your study in China, etcetera, but he didn't say anything about politics to me. And I also didn't tell him anaything.   

**Q:**  From the US documents, I know that the Americans sent a letter, probably through Gyalo Thondup, saying it would be better for the Dalai Lama to flee abroad. This was in September or October after he went to back to Tibet, and before many Chinese troops arrived.   

**A:**  Maybe, but nothing like this was said in the Kashag. This must have been kept somewhere in a corner [Tib. ཁུག་ཀྱོག].   

**Q:**  It is hard to know the Tibetan government's way of working.   

**A:**  It is very hard.   

**Q:**  We don't know where the American government's letter went, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Actually, the Kashag should have discussed the letter saying that this was sent by the American government, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but they didn't.   

**Q:**  I think these things were done by Phala Drönyerchemmo?   

**A:**  Yes. Regarding these matters, there were some people around the Dalai Lama and those people might have kept it. If they would tell us, the lower level, it would get spread around, so they might have thought it would get spread. Anyway, they didn't tell the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Some say that Yabshi Taklha Depön was pro-Chinese. Some say he was anti-Chinese. What was he?   

**A:**  I think he was someone regular [Tib. སྤྱིར་བཏང], and calm or tranquil [Tib. ལྷིང་པོ]. I don't think he liked the Chinese that much, but he also wasn't one who was opposing the Chinese right away, and he would not say something strongly to the Chinese. He was trying to make good relations. We just met each other, but didn't hold meetings.   

**Q:**  What is your opinion of the two sitsab? They opposed the Chinese from the start. So do you think the seed for the 1959 revolt was planted by them in 1951-52? Do you think they made a great mistake? Did your friends also think that it was the wrong policy?   

**A:**  I can't say that. But I was thinking that their policy was a dangerous one. We had fought and lost in Chamdo. If we tried to fight again, we would lose for sure. The two sitsab didn't talk to me openly, but we were suspicious of them because they [sitsab] told us to deliver the petition. Lukhangwa was very tough [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ] when he talked and he was very strange. He wasn't cautious or afraid of expressing his views.   

**Q:**  Did you and your relatives think that the Tibetan government could remain as before, or did you think we should implement the reforms? And what was your real thought or wish then?   

**A:**  I didn't think that the all the previous things could remain as before, but that we would have to do the reforms gradually. I thought that we could not stay without doing the reforms, but I didn't have the thought of doing it at once. For example, I thought that if there were five points, we should implement one each year, not all at once. I didn't think we could implement all of the points at once. If we did it gradually, it would be appropriate.   

**Q:**  Did most people have that thought?   

**A:**  Yes. This was suitable because if you implement one point, then you will get used to it and do the next one gradually. It is hard to do it all at once and I was also afraid of doing it right away. For doing this, at first we should be friendly. If they say that they are doing this reform, and if you say that you are going to do it gradually, they also have to think about it, right? If we get confrontational right away, then it is finished and you would have to put their hat on your own head and this would not be good [wouldn't fit well]. In the beginning, I didn't have that thought. But after Chamdo was lost, I knew that we couldn't handle the Chinese and it would be better to do it gradually. I think the sitsab's comments and attitudes were too strong. Since they had the political power, they would get confrontational right away. Many people might have thought the same as the sitsab, but they wouldn't express this openly.   

**Q:**  Could the Kashag go around the sitsab and approach the Dalai Lama directly and say that what the sitsab did was wrong?   

**A:**  No. It was hard because the sitsab were there. We have to go through the procedure. If we would go directly to the Dalai Lama, it would violate the system and it would become like not respecting the sitsab.   

**Q:**  Could you do it surreptitiously without the sitsab knowing?   

**A:**  Oh, if we did that and if the sitsab found out, it would seem as if we didn't respect them. When the sitsab were there we had to go through them. Even when the Kashag prepared a document for the sitsab to approve they would make the corrections before sending it to the Dalai Lama. So all was under them. They were like a throat and it was not easy to cope with. If there was no sitsab, then the Kashag could deal directly with the Dalai Lama. Then the power of the Kashag would be increased a lot. In the past, there was no custom of having a sitsab when the Dalai Lama was in power. But they were appointed when the Dalai Lama was going to Yadong, so when he returned, it was inconvenient for him to tell them to leave and they stayed on.   

**Q:**  At this time, there was a dispute within the People's Liberation Army. Fan Ming, coming from the northwest, and Tan Guansan, coming from the southwest, weren't friendly. Did you in the Kashag know this?   

**A:**  No. We didn't know this clearly in 1951-52. Later, we would know about that, right?   

**Q:**  When do you mean?   

**A:**  Later when Fan Ming fell we knew that. Before that, it was very hard to know their internal affairs.   

**Q:**  This was in 1958, I heard that Fan Ming had strong leftist views at this time, wanting reforms right then, etcetera. When he came to meet you people, how was that?   

**A:**  Fan Ming met Lukhangwa many times, but they always [verbally] fought with each other. It was kind of reckless. One would say that what you said was a violation against the policy and the other would say, I have not.   

**Q:**  What did they fight about? Do you remember the reasons why they fought?   

**A:**  The main issue was that when we lost the Chamdo War, our soldiers were hit in the head. So there was no point in having them do studies. The People's Liberation Army said, "You shouldn't say that about the matter of making war. We killed your people and you killed our people. You shouldn't think in that way." Lukhangwa was the type who said what he felt, but didn't listen to or think about the positions of others. So there was nothing to do. And he was very loyal to the old Tibetan government. So he was always apprehensive that the [Tibetan government] might get some bad effect. Therefore, since he was there, it was hard to do the work.   

**Q:**  Did the kalön have close social contacts with the Chinese military officers, like throwing parties and playing mahjong?   

**A:**  Yes, but not much. The Kashag invited them back and forth for dinner. We had this on Tibetan and Chinese festivals, like the Tibetan New Year and the Spring Festival [Ch. chun jie]. But the sitsab didn't attend much.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese leaders come to visit the people's homes in a casual manner to talk?   

**A:**  Yes, they would.   

**Q:**  Did Zhang Jingwu mostly come?   

**A:**  It was not certain. He wouldn't come much, but the officers under him, like the Chief of Staff [Ch. can mou zhang], would come. They used to come and say that some People's Liberation Army soldiers were being pushed or hit. There were many such things happening. So they came to ask us to tell the people not to do this. They came to tell us because an incident had happened and the Kashag didn't know about it.   

**Q:**  I heard that the People's Liberation Army got angry in 1952 and beat up a Tshogchen Shengo) during the Mönlam?   

**A:**  I never heard this. It wouldn't be possible and it is difficult since the monks would beat them back.   

**Q:**  Was the People's Liberation Army secretly ambushing them?   

**A:**  I didn't hear that, and I don't think it would be likely. If the shengo is alive, he might tell you. In 1951-52, we were only able to implement some of the smaller things in the Agreement, such as the Society School, the Woman's Association, the Youth League. These we could decide, but the bigger ones we weren't able to discuss in 1951-52.   

**Q:**  At this time, what was your main work since 1952?   

**A:**  I had two jobs. One, I was in charge of the government grain. Two, I was the director [Tib. ཞུ་རེན] of the Youth League's Construction Committee [Tib. ྾ཨིཨུ་ཇིཨན་ཝེཨི་ཡུཨན]. The Grain Office had a lot of work, like buying and selling grain. We had to collect the grain and pay the salaries to the monk and lay officials and to the soldiers. The Youth League invited me because I was still young then.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there at the time (based on giving salary)?   

**A:**  In Lhasa there were about 3,000.   

**Q:**  I read in some document that in 1952, the two sitsab called the Shigatse Artillery Regiment [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་དམག་སྒར] to Lhasa because they thought there was a danger that we [Tibetan government] would be defeated? Did they really do that?   

**A:**  They were not called to Lhasa. They were probably organized in Shigatse to be on guard [Tib. ས་སྲུང] because they were in Shigatse.   

**Q:**  This was when the People's Association caused the disturbance. The Chinese military officers heard that Lukhangwa called up the Artillery Regiment. So they [Chinese] were afraid that they would get attacked.   

**A:**  The Shigatse Regiment was recalled [Tib. སྐྱར་གསོ] after it was scattered, but it probably didn't come to Lhasa. They were not called there. The other regiments were all scattered for good.   

**Q:**  When did they reorganize it?   

**A:**  This was started in 1952.   

**Q:**  How did the Khambas come to Lhasa and cause the revolt and launch the revolt in Kham? Then Alo Chöndze and Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ལགས] made the People's Association. How did these incidents occur all of a sudden? According to my point of view, after the demotion of the sitsab, from 1952-1955, things were okay because it was kind of relaxed and there was no fighting, right? But after that, the situation became worse and the revolt took place in 1959.   

**A:**  What we were apprehensive about was that though it didn't have a direct connection with the Kashag, the democratic reforms had been implemented in other provinces. Lhasa heard about this and was uncomfortable with this news. People became very frightened about this although Tibet was peacefully liberated. So in 1955, Alo Chöndze started a small organization in Kham. The revolt took place in Kham, not in Lhasa. After 1956-1957, it became worse and Andrutsang's group started the organization. After 1955, it was not good and the Khambas' disturbances started.   

**Q:**  When the Khambas started their revolt, why didn't the Tibetan government stop them?   

**A:**  On this regard, Zhongyang suggested [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] and told the government to advise the Khambas. And the Tibetan government went through the motions of sending officials to talk with them, such as Minkyilinga [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང]. The people sent by the local government were probably coincidently not good [Tib. ཁ་ཐུག་ཡག་པོ་མ་འཁེལ་བ]. It would be a little better if a thoughtful person who could see all the things was sent there. But they just went there and said something like regular [rote] things, and they listened to whatever they [Khambas] told them, and they were unable to suppress [Tib. མནན] them well. The Kashag called a tsondu "To cease the Khambas' disturbance and to mollify Zhongyang [Tib. krung dbyang dgongs pa dangs thabs dang khams rigs zing cha 'jags thabs]." But this meeting was unsuccessful.   

**Q:**  When did they hold this meeting?   

**A:**  It was in 1957, soon after the Dalai Lama returned from India. Before he went, there were no disturbances, except Alo Chöndze's organization [which] was in existence. This was like a false People's Association. Later this organization became bigger and bigger. []   

**Q:**  What was discussed at the meeting?   

**A:**  I wasn't at the meeting, so I don't know. Since I worked in the Grain Office, I just did the two jobs until the revolt.   

**Q:**  Did you hear anything about it?   

**A:**  Much of what you hear isn't true, it is just rumors. Anyway, it was unsuccessful.   

**Q:**  Who present at the meeting is still alive? Shatra?   

**A:**  There probably isn't anybody left because it was 40 years ago. At that time, I was not that old. But I am 80 now. There isn't anyone left from the top officials. Maybe some from the more junior ones are still alive. Ngabö is there. He is in his 80's. He is older than me.   

**Q:**  Was the topic of the meeting to discuss the methods on how to deal with the Khambas?   

**A:**  It was to cease the Khambas' disturbance and mollify Zhongyang. It sounds good and it was intended to be meant to dismantle the Khambas' organization and to apologize to Zhongyang. But it wasn't implemented.   

**Q:**  Since the end of 1955, the CIA of the US government started making relations with the Tibetan government. And Jenkhentsisum was in Kalimpong and they made relations with Andrutsang. Since 1957, the US took some Tibetans for training. At the end of 1957, some of them were parachuted into Tibet. They were not getting a salary from the US. They were from Chushigandru and they were taught wireless transmission and sent to survey the situation of Tibet. I know this from the US side. One of those parachuted was called Litang Athar. He is in India. He told me all about their work. When the US government asked, "To whom should we support," they [these Khambas] said that they should help the Dalai Lama and not the Tibetan government. So we [the US] didn't know whether the two [Phala and Tibetan Government] were the same or not. The US government was thinking that they were doing the work through the Drönyerchemmo according to the thoughts of the Dalai Lama. So it seems that the Drönyerchemmo had some of his own people, like Tseja Gyentsen la [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] and Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ]. Would it be possible that they could make relations with the US without the Kashag knowing about this? On the one hand, they were doing it by themselves. On the other hand, might some of the Kashag members have known that. I wonder whether the Dalai Lama knew this or not?   

**A:**  If they made the relations by themselves, they could do that and the Kashag wouldn't know it. And they wouldn't tell this to the Kashag members.   

**Q:**  Did Phala Drönyerchemmo have such power to do that?   

**A:**  According to the local government [rule], he was not allowed to have that kind of political power. He was just supposed to be the personal attendant of the Dalai Lama. Actually, he should have told the Kashag [about the Americans], but since this was secret work, this could be done from anywhere. It was possible to have a secret organization that reported to the Dalai Lama and people were not allowed to say anything about this because they would report it to the Dalai Lama. The Kashag would not know about that. If all the Kashag ministers knew, then Ngabö would know because they were the same [kalön]. So he probably didn't know because they wouldn't tell all of the Kashag members. They might have said it as a tight secret.   

**Q:**  Would the Dalai Lama know that?   

**A:**  I don't know whether they had reported it to the Dalai Lama or not because this was a separate organization, which would be called the organization around the Dalai Lama's room [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་མཐའ་སྐོར].   

**Q:**  Their work was very influential.   

**A:**  Wasn't it?   

**Q:**  Yes, the Khamba's revolt was influenced by that.   

**A:**  The one who created the revolt in Lhasa at first in 1959 was Phala Chemmo. It was said that he sent two of his tsidrung to Lhasa telling people that the Chinese had invited the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was it Barshi [Tib. བར་གཞིས] Tsendrön?   

**A:**  No, it was Temajog [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོག] Tsidrung. He went first to shout out about this. I heard this from prisonmates in 1959. They said, "He [Temajog] said that first, so we went there running." When they went to Norbulinga, they held the meeting and we were also involved in the meeting. I didn't know much of what was going on, but they told me to come for a tsondu.   

**Q:**  Did the tsidrung actually say that he was sent by Phala?   

**A:**  He had told this to the representatives of the people who later became prisoners.   

**Q:**  Why did Phala send them?   

**A:**  They were called to protect the Dalai Lama. Nothing else. They were told to come stop the Dalai Lama from going there. This was actually a rumor, although the Chinese were not going to arrest the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  If Phala really didn't think that, he might have had another plan.   

**A:**  Who knows. He didn't say that. Anyway, it was to cause the disturbance.   

**Q:**  Was it mainly for causing the disturbance or for protecting the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  It was not that clear whether it was to protect the Dalai Lama or not, but I doubt that it was to cause the disturbance.   

**Q:**  Later, they might have done research on this, right?   

**A:**  Probably, but I didn't do any research except [for what] I heard that when I was with a representative of the people in the jail and he said this and that.   

**Q:**  Weren't you a magji? How did this come about?   

**A:**  When the uprising took place and when the people were holding meetings I was at home. Two government staff officials came and said, Today there is a tsondu of all kudrak in Norbulinga. You must come."   

**Q:**  What kind of meeting did they tell you it was about?   

**A:**  They said, "There is a government meeting being held in Norbulinga, and all of the local government [officials] are going to attend. You should also attend the meeting."   

**Q:**  Were the two of them government officials?   

**A:**  No, they were government low level staff, like clerks [Tib. ལྟོ་ཟན].   

**Q:**  Was this on the 1st of the 2nd month?   

**A:**  Yes, it was the first day when the disturbance took place. Being a government official, I thought I couldn't refuse to go because I was in the organization. I was an official, so I put on my official uniform and went. I didn't go to the main gate as I heard there were a lot of disturbances, so I went to the north gate. It was already locked. I asked and found out that all the other gates but the main one were locked and there was danger. Then I went toward the main gate.   

**Q:**  Did you come riding on a horse or what?   

**A:**  Yes, I came by horse. If I came by car I thought they would stone me. I had heard about Sambo's incident.   

**Q:**  Did you hear about that?   

**A:**  Yes. I heard that he was stoned. They called me to the meeting. At the main gate I met Drepung Tseja [Tib. ཚ་ཕྱག] who I knew in the past. He said, "Oh you shouldn't go to the main gate. Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] Khenjung has been killed and they may throw stones at your head." I thought he was probably right, so I returned home. The next day I stayed at home. They had divided up into smaller teams [Ch. zu]. One team was led by Taktra Chandzö and he was responsible to send the messages. They had held the meetings on the 1st, but I didn't attend. On the 2nd, Taktra Chandzö sent a person saying that yesterday I didn't go to the tsondu, [so] today I had to go since the tsondu was very important.I thought if I didn't go there would be trouble, so I went again on horseback. On the 2nd there was no disturbance at the main gate.   

**Q:**  There were not many people near the gate, right?   

**A:**  They were scattered and organized, and some of them had gone home. There were guards there who were soldiers and many people were guards.   

**Q:**  Did they have weapons?   

**A:**  Yes. There were many members from the meeting lined up there who we would call false people [association] [unclear]. So I went into Norbulinga. I sat at the head area of the tsondu. There was a vote for the magji, but it couldn't be done that day. Then people asked me to speak and say my thoughts. I spoke and said two points. One, "The killing of someone yesterday near the Norbulinga gate is not good and this is a serious incident." Two, "Having the meeting here in Norbulinga is not good because the Dalai Lama hasn't left. He will be polluted by the odor of the meeting and it is not good to cause disturbances. I think we should do like the Chinese proverb, "Try to get the egg without scaring the chicken [Tib. བྱ་མ་འདྲོགས་པར་སྒོང་ང་ལེན་ཐབས་བྱེད་དགོས་རེད]." Actually, at that time, I said the wrong thing because it meant that we should attain independence slowly [Tib. ག་ལེར] [through guile]. I also said that, "If we cause disturbances, as the Chinese have many artillery, they will destroy us at once. That's not good at all. I know their strength from having been at Chamdo."   

**Q:**  Who were the main leaders at the meeting?   

**A:**  The main leaders were the Drungtsi and they took the responsibility. Whatever kind of meeting was held, the Drungtsi were responsible.   

**A:**  According to my understanding, it was a people's tsondu.   

**A:**  It was a people's tsondu, but there should be some heads. These were the Drungtsi. If there were no Drungtsi, the tsondu had no law [was not lawful]. The meeting mainly consisted of the representatives of the people.   

