# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0002.02 : Tape 2  
## : with Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein, Tashi Tsering and Trindor  
**Name:** Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 79  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] was a Kalön and was also the Governor-General of Chamdo (the Doji) in 1950. In this interview, he discusses his position on reforms as well as his selection as a "people's" magji in Norbulinga during the 1959 uprising. He also discusses what Chairman Mao told him during their meeting regarding the People’s Association and the reforms that were to be made.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0002_02/H_0002_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What was the tsondu discussing on the 2nd day?   

**A:**  It was just people saying that we must stop the Dalai Lama from going there and that we want to be independent. They were talking recklessly [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང].   

**Q:**  I know that at this time they wanted independence, but how was the discussion about the methods for this? Did they think that the US would help or what were they thinking? And the PRC was very powerful.   

**A:**  Yes, they couldn't handle them. They were doing like crazy work. They were saying that we should rise up for independence and we will sacrifice our lives. They were saying reckless things. They didn't have any confidence. So I told them not to do that because there was danger in doing that.   

**Q:**  The people who were saying that, were they the masses or the government officials?   

**A:**  The masses. They were the representatives of the false masses.   

**Q:**  Who was there? Manang Abo was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Manang Abo and the man in charge of sending the horse corvées in Shöl who was called Shölpa Tatonga [Tib. ཞོལ་པ་རྟ་གཏོང་བ]. He was eloquent and he represented the others and talked at the meeting.   

**Q:**  Was he from Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. Then there was Yabshi Chandzö Könchog Rinchen [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་རིན་ཆེན]. There were about 8 representatives of the mimang who were at the tsondu. They were all saying reckless things and I thought that we could only lose. So I told them in detail that we would be defeated. There were not many people supporting me, but at the end of the meeting, Ta lama Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] spoke. He said, "Lhalu's comments are good. It is really very dangerous. If the Chinese really fire many cannons, we will get scattered like beans." But according to the revolution [the Chinese], I made a mistake because I said that we should get the egg without scaring the chicken. But, regarding actual work, I told them not to make war. Then they appointed me as a kind of magji.   

**Q:**  How did they appoint the magji? Did they vote?   

**A:**  Yes, they voted.   

**Q:**  When they voted, were there other names, or how did they do that?   

**A:**  Yes. There were other names. Since I didn't go to the meeting on the 1st day, on that [day] they had already appointed a set of magji. And on the next day, they said that the main magji should be increased. Among the old magji, some of them had to attend the tsondu and I was among the new magji who were appointed on the second day.   

**Q:**  Who were the old ones?   

**A:**  Kundeling dzasa and Khenjung Tara [Tib. རྟ་ར] were the main ones. Under them there were three magji.   

**Q:**  Was this called the military headquarters [Tib. དམག་བཀོད་ཁང]?   

**A:**  No. We just called it Command Center [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང]. It was actually the Revolt Command Center [Tib. ཟིང་འཕུག; Ch. si ling yuan], but I wasn't able to do much work as a magji. On the 4th, I went to Norbulinga. On that day, the magji were not there because they went to the meeting [in Shöl]. The people below had a close relationship with the old magji and I was among the 5 who were newly appointed, so they said, "If the old ones are not there, we don't know how to work. It will not be okay if we don't have the old ones back." Although I was thinking about the revolt, they didn't trust me much. I said, "It doesn't make a difference to me if you like them. They can do that. Anyway, whoever will do the work well, it will be okay. We will leave the post." So I only worked for one day. After that, I stayed in Lhasa and I didn't do much work. But I had the name of a magji, so it was bad. At that time I kind of separated myself from the meeting, but I had a fault [according to the Chinese]. When I went back to Lhasa, I could have gone over to the Chinese side and I would have become a progressive [Tib. ཡར་ཐོན], but I didn't and I just stayed in Lhasa. So I was [said to be] involved in the revolt and imprisoned.   

**Q:**  How many people were at the tsondu?   

**A:**  There were many people of all sorts. About 100-200 kudrak, and there were all sorts of mimang.   

**Q:**  Was there something to sign?   

**A:**  Yes. All the kudrak signed. It was signed on the 2nd day.   

**Q:**  What was that signed document for?   

**A:**  The masses said they want Tibetan independence, and we all said that we agreed with that and signed our names. This was the worst thing because we had to agree to that. If we had signed for a good thing, there would have been no problem.   

**Q:**  Was there discussion about starting a new government?   

**A:**  It wasn't done on the 2nd. That came a bit later. Since we [verbally] fought, I didn't do the magji post and stayed in Lhasa. In Lhasa, I had to do some things, like paying the grain salary [his government position].   

**Q:**  How long were you in prison.   

**A:**  Not long. For 6 years.   

**Q:**  In 1957-58, some say that Surkhang and Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] had relations with Chushigandru and that they were helping Chushigandru surreptitiously. But some also say that Surkhang had pro-Chinese thoughts? You have done research on the documents and held many meetings. What do you think?   

**A:**  Probably not. I don't know clearly. We just read the history books, we couldn't search the government documents. [laughter] I didn't see anything like this in the history books. I can't tell you clearly about Surkhang.   

**Q:**  Did you hear anything about some Kashag members and Trijang Lama openly making some good relation [with the Chinese], when they actually were making connections with the Khambas?   

**A:**  I don't know [about] that because I was not working with Surkhang. But you never know what kind of a person Surkhang was. He was not easy to cope with. He might not have done that openly in the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Some say that Trijang Lama was slightly a political lama?   

**A:**  No. He was a real lama who was an extraordinary [Tib. བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པ] lama. He always said don't do this and that. This was just [because] some people said reckless things because there were different sects who liked or did not like each other.   

**Q:**  Yes, they were saying reckless things, but my job is to make it clear whether it is true or a lie.   

**A:**  Oh, this is not true. Trijang Lama wouldn't do that. If he did, he would violate the religion. But between the different sects there was a lot of bias and saying reckless things. Since this was said in society, some people thought that this was true and picked it up.   

**Q:**  If you look back at the revolt, was there anything that could have been done to avoid it if we had used a different path? Or would the revolt have taken place in any case?   

**A:**  I went to China in 1956 on a visiting tour [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར]. I think that if we held peaceful talks and did the reforms slowly, it might have been possible to avoid the revolt. I had a discussion with Chairman Mao and he asked me, "Would you be afraid if the democratic reforms would be done?" I said, "I would be afraid." Mao said, "You don't have to be afraid, we won't kill you. The aristocrats and your livelihood won't deteriorate. For example, there is Rong Yiren [who is now a Vice Chairman] who is still there. And if we compare him with you, he was much richer. If you don't believe me, you should go to his house and see how his lifestyle is." So I went to his house and his family members were all there. All of his factories were given to the state, but it paid him in money for these, which is now called "redeeming" [Tib. བླུ་ཉོ], and when he was using the money, it was okay for him. So I thought that if in Tibet we had gradual reforms, it could turn out alright. As human beings, what we mainly wanted to have was our livelihoods and that our rights would not deteriorate. So I thought what Chairman Mao said was probably right and I believed in this. As for the ideas that I had, in 1957 I was planning to leave my big house. I saw that Rong Yiren was living in a small house like this. I thought that this was the path to go. In the west of Lhasa in Yamda [Tib. ཡབ་མདའ], there was a happy park where I had built a big fence and a small house, like a summer cottage in which I had a full set of things like a vegetable garden. I thought this would be good in the future and so it was not the case that I didn't prepare for that [reforms]. But, since the revolt took place, I didn't have to say those things because it kind of vanished and it became the opposite. But since you mentioned that, I just told you about this. I thought of going on that path, but most people thought of going slowly and at that time, we were treated in a gentle manner. If we did that, then Sendregasum would have had their religious financial income because they [government] would have to pay a salary to the monks. So I thought it would be good. I have a little bit of faith in religion and I thought of making a good arrangement for religion. If we did that slowly, everything would be good. I thought in that way, but at the time of the revolt, my thoughts also didn't work out because I myself joined the revolt. If someone would ask me, "Why did you join the revolt if you had that thoughts?" At that critical point, it was very dangerous. I had a wrong thought when I was thinking about whether to join the revolt or not. I thought I had built the house and it was okay if I went on that path slowly, but I thought that if I turned my ass against the Tibetan government and let it down when it was almost getting toppled, this would be slightly shameful because the Tibetan government had fed me for many generations and I was a high ranking Tibetan government official. So I thought that I didn't have any choice but to attend the meeting and do something peacefully. But I didn't have the thought of shooting at China. I was supposed to do that and also said that we should do it in a peaceful manner, like getting the egg without scaring the chicken [Tib. བྱ་མ་འདྲོགས་པའི་འོག་ནས་སྒོ་ང་ལོན་པ]. "If you make war, they will fire cannons and split you into pieces." Since the revolt took place, I didn't have any choice but to join it. Otherwise, I could have gone there [to the Chinese] right away because I had relations with the Chinese Military Headquarters [Ch. jun qu]. And they [the other Tibetan] might also have been suspicious because I had been the director of the Youth League Construction Committee. They [the Chinese] also called me [to stay with them], but I thought if I went it would be embarrassing [Tib. ཐབས་སྐྱོ་པོ], but I didn't have a plan to shoot guns. And if they were going to fire guns, I was going to ask to leave because if we made war, we would lose. But when I got there, I found that my legs had already sunk into the swamp and I couldn't get out. It was finished. [laughter] So that is why I got involved in the revolt and [was] imprisoned. This was where I took the wrong path, but it was hard for me to make the decision. I thought if I would not go, it would be shameful because I had spent half of my life in the old society. If I would go, I would fall over the precipice. But I thought we could hold peaceful discussions and do something gradually. But it didn't work out and I fell into the swamp.   

**Q:**  I heard that Mao Zedong spoke a little bit about the People's Association, saying that they didn't make a big mistake and they just didn't know what was good and what was bad. Did you give a speech about your meeting with Mao Zedong after you arrived in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I didn't say that in the speech. I just said what Chairman Mao told me. He didn't say that the People's Association was bad, and of course he wouldn't say that they were good, right? He didn't say anything [about the People's Association]. When he met me he said, "You should do the democratic reforms. And you high ranking kudrak and the lamas and incarnations of the monasteries should consult with the masses who are the object of the reform." He meant this as we should be friendly and we should consult with them and let loose [Tib. གློད] little by little [give up things].   

**Q:**  Did you say that after you came to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, I announced that in a big meeting.   

**Q:**  Was that a Kashag meeting?   

**A:**  This was a revolutionary style of meeting consisting of kudrak and the representative of the kudrak and the masses. The meeting was organized by the United Front Work Bureau and the [Tibetan] government officials, the representatives of the masses were also called. I gave a speech about this and said that Chairman Mao told us, "You should do it slowly, do not do it quickly. The people above and below have to consult, and the main thing is that you [kudrak] should think about it." So when we had to do it slowly, we also had to let go of some of our things. And one should also think about having things sufficient for oneself, right?   

**Q:**  Was it in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that at the end of the year?   

**A:**  I probably said that at the end of April. This was after the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up and the meeting was held separately.   

**Q:**  Thank you.   

