# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0002.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein, Tashi Tsering and Trindor  
**Name:** Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 79  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] was a Kalön and was also the Governor-General of Chamdo (Doji) in 1950. In this interview, he discusses political and bureaucratic conflicts between Tibet and China during the 1950s. He discusses some of the encounters with the Chinese Army in 1950, including the capturing of 2 Tibetan wireless operators. He also describes the situation surrounding the acceptance of the 17-Point Agreement and the conflcit between the Sitsab and the Kashag. He also talks about how the price of grain became inflated.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0002_03/H_0002_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I heard that when you were the Dome Jigyab and when the People's Liberation Army had reached the other side of the Yangtze River, you had some relations with the Nangchen Chief [Tib. <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a>], and the pön under him were to attack the People's Liberation Army before the People's Liberation Army came to this side. Please tell us about this.   

**A:**  [laughter] It was not like that. The original cause was because we didn't fully understand [the situation]. At this time, Silling had been liberated but the People's Liberation Army couldn't reach Jyekundo because it was far away. Since Nangchen belonged to Silling, it was kind of liberated in name, but the People's Liberation Army troops hadn't reached Nangchen. So at this time, from Qinghai, a Chinese representative came to Nangchen. He was called Representative (Ch. daibiao) Le. Later it turned out he wasn't good. At first, people didn't know about that, and then he came out as a false revolutionary.   

**Q:**  He was Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was probably a Guomindang official who a little bit later joined the revolution [Communists]. He said that he was going as the representative to Jyekundo. He came to Jyekundo which is now called Yushu saying that he was the representative of the CCP. He was probably appointed as the representative.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers did he have?   

**A:**  I don't know the number, he probably didn't have many when he came up. When he arrived there, there was a full organization including soldiers in Jyekundo. It was ready for him to become the official in charge. At this time, the border of Jyekundo was at Denma [Tib. ལྡན་མ], which belonged to Derge. If you cross the mountain pass from Jyekundo, there is a place called Dzamdo [Tib. ?] on the other side of the pass. At that time, we also had to look at the situation. So in order to find out what was going on in Jyekundo, we left a telegraph team in Dzamdo. If you had to deliver a message to Chamdo, it would take many days on horseback so they would deliver the message to Dzamdo to the Wireless Office which was a simple one, and from there they would send the wireless message to Chamdo where the main wireless office was. From Chamdo, we would send the information on to Lhasa. Le Daibiao came to know that we had set up the wireless unit in Dzamdo, so all of a sudden he brought about 60 cavalry and surrounded the wireless unit. According to the treaty with Qinghai, we were not allowed to station soldiers in that place. We had 2 young wireless operators who were from Gangtok, and 2 Tibetans working there. He captured two of the wireless operators and took the equipment back to Jyekundo. This was the cause at the beginning.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  This was at the beginning of 1950. We couldn't stay idle and we had to get the wireless equipment back. But it was impossible to get that unless we would have sent soldiers, right? If we did that [send troops], the issue would become big. Though I had a full set of soldiers, I was not allowed to make the decision to enagage in war, so I sent a report to the government [in Lhasa] saying it has happened like this so "How about sending soldiers to get the wireless equipment back. We don't have soldiers there [in Jyekundo] so if we don't send soldiers, it will be difficult. What shall we do?" If we had to get it back, there would be a few casualties because he also had soldiers. The Kashag said, "Although we have to do it, for the present [time], don't go there rashly." At that time, one side was liberated, but on the other side, the remnants of the old society like the soldiers of Ma Bufang were still there. Although Qinghai was liberated, Jyekundo was unable to [be] liberated but a representative had arrived.   

**Q:**  What did you do with the Nangchen Pön?   

**A:**  We had to do something. The local [Tibetan] government told us, "At present, get well prepared. If you go there all of a sudden and if a big war would break out, it won't be good." We were saying that we were going there because we had no choice but to make war because we lost the wireless. But if we had to go there, we would confront Le Daibiao, not the masses. Therefore, we had to make some relations with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> people. There was a person named Tsetra [Tib. ཚེ་བཀྲ] from Riwoche, and he made relations with the two strongest <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a> in Jyekundo named Drao Biu and Bochen Biwu. The main one was Drao Biu. We made connections with him and told him, "We must get back the 2 wireless operators and the equipment. In this regard we have some work to do. Please help us." Otherwise, we wouldn't tell them we were going to make war, right? It would not be okay to say that and I didn't say that. At this time, I had made some preparations to attack Jyekundo, as 1-2 people couldn't get that [wireless] back, right?   

**Q:**  After sometime, did you make war?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. Actually, at that time Jyekundo was empty. We could have taken it, though it would not have been good in the future. We almost took it and made some preparations for war. Later, when Ganze was liberated, the People's Liberation Army became stronger because their troops were coming up from Ganze, although they [were] unable to reach Qinghai. I received a message from the local [Lhasa] government telling me that I would bear the responsibility. It said, "If you attack and take Jyekundo, you have to think carefully whether you will be able to guarantee to [hold it]. If you cannot guarantee [that], then it will be difficult." I replied, "It would not be okay if I didn't report it, but it is difficult for me to guarantee it because I don't [know] what would happen in the future. So I will drop the plan to attack Jyekundo." If I would have attacked it, for the present (at that time), I would have won, but since this was a liberated area, later when the People's Liberation Army would have come, I would not have been able to handle them and it would have been dangerous. In the beginning, if they would have told me to get the wireless, I would have attacked. But later there was the issue of guaranteeing [success], which meant I would have had to hold the place. Also, at that time my term was over and the new Dome Jigyab was confirmed and was coming, so I was going to leave.   

**Q:**  Had 4 years passed?   

**A:**  We had to leave after 3 years. Just before the 4th year, I called a meeting in Chamdo of all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a>, and the well-known Khambas. If I had called a big meeting, the talks might have gotten leaked. I said at the meeting, "What shall we do? If we take it [Jyekundo], it is hard to bear the responsibility." I thought that we didn't know for how long we could bear the responsibility [to hold it], right? Then the people at the meeting said, "On the one hand, it is hard to guarantee that, and on the other hand, if we attack, there will be a little bit of trouble. The new Doji is to come and the new Doji will have this problem left for him. It would become like making a big mess [for him] so it will be better not to fight." So we didn't fight and had to carry the misfortune [Tib. སྡུག་གྱོང་འཁྱེར].   

**Q:**  Later, did they release the two wireless operators?   

**A:**  When the People's Liberation Army came to Jyekundo and when Chamdo was liberated, Le ran away. He happened to be a bad person and he was a fake. Later, it seemed to us that his act of taking our people and the equipment was a strategy to stir up trouble between us and the People's Liberation Army. But it happened to be the time of changing the Doji and we didn't have to fight. When Chamdo was liberated, he was about to get exposed. At that time, along with the People's Liberation Army coming from Ganze, Getag [Tib. དགེ་སྟག] Lama had come to Chamdo [for talks on behalf of the CCP]. We told him about our people and the wireless equipmnt and asked him what we should do. He said that Zhang Guohua and the People's Liberation Army didn't know anything about this and they were asking how did that happen. The People's Liberation Army hadn't told him to take the wireless equipment. He just did that by himself. After Le ran away, Ngabö sent me a wireless [message] from Chamdo when I was in Kongpo Giamda saying that Le Daibiao had fled. I also sent a wireless to Lhasa zbout that. After Chamdo and the Agreement was signed, we had to catch Le together. [laughter] And the People's Liberation Army also told us to catch him, but the People's Liberation Army couldn't reach Lhasa. So we were told to stop him on the borders. I also sent the wireless messge about him fleeing to Lhasa and they were able to stop him in Yadong. He was arrested and handed over to the People's Liberation Army when they arrived in Lhasa. He was shut up in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a>'s House where there now is the school. I later heard that he escaped. Anyway, he disappeared.   

**Q:**  In the summer of 1950, Rupön Bökhangwa [Tib. སྦུད་ཁང་བ] died in battle and the soldiers got discouraged. Can you talk about this?   

**A:**  His name was Bökhangwa.   

**Q:**  Was he under Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] Depön right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> Shigatse Regiment, the third regiment.   

**Q:**  At that time, he was very famous, right?   

**A:**  [laughter] Yes. He was the one who was famous then. Before that, he was for making war [answer not finished].   

**Q:** I heard that he was a hunchback.   

**A:**  He was not the hunchback one. The hunchback one was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment. Bökhangwa was a fat, imposing man.   

**Q:**  He was probably from Tö, right?   

**A:**  No. he was from Rimpung [Tib. རིན་སྤུང]. He lived near the house of the historical person named Shingshagpa Tseden Dorje [Tib. ཞིང་ཤག་པ་ཚེ་བརྟན་རྡོ་རྗེ]. Before that, he was a person who didn't know about politics, but he liked to engage in war. He had fought many times in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྔོན] 1. Amdo. 2. Lake Kokonor.">Tsongön</a> War with Ma Bufang and won earlier, and he got good prizes and got the name of a hero. At that time, when the provinces fought each other, we were okay. [laughter] He did that every time, and later he had a problem when he was defending the Denma Chöngor [Tib. ལྡན་མ་ཆོས་འཁོར] Monastery. In this area, The Drolma Lhakang was in the southern part and the Chöngor [monastery] was in the north. It was written in the book. So the People's Liberation Army arrived in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. སྒྲོལ་མ, 2. གྲོ་མ] 1. The goddess Tara. 2. A woman&#x27;s name. 3. A wild sweet potato.">Droma</a> Lhakang. Bökhangwa had gone with Tibetan soldiers to get horses and not to make war, and he had also hung bells on the horses. All of a sudden, he [was] confronted by the People's Liberation Army's sentry. The Tibetan militia from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a>, that is from Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Lho<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང] and Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] dzong, who were [under] his command, didn't arrive. So Bökhangwa sent the weapons for them ahead on pack animals. Before Bökhangwa arrived there, the loads were transported ahead and they [were] confronted [by] the People's Liberation Army sentry. And probably, the sentry might have asked what those were because they knew that they were loaded with guns and they performed sort of a customs check. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> thought that they would take away the guns and they shouted that the People's Liberation Army was taking away the guns. Therefore, they confronted each other right away. As I mentioned above, Bökhangwa was a thoughtless person, like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> monk. [laughter] So he took his gun and charged forward.   

**Q:**  Is this place on the other side or this side of the Yangtze River?   

**A:**  It is on this side and they were going to the Chöngor Monastery, which is on the north side. And they confronted the People's Liberation Army sentry in the forest. They fought each other a little bit and Bökhangwa was lost. There were a few casualties from both sides. When I knew this [found out about this], I told them we should not do that. If we did that, there would be a big fight. The People's Liberation Army also sent me a letter saying that the leaders didn't give the order [to shoot] and they said that we shouldn't do this, we should hold peaceful talks. Then it was stopped like this.   

**Q:**  Although Bökhangwa died, who won the battle?   

**A:**  The sentries were withdrawn and the place was left empty.   

**Q:**  They fought in that place, but there wasn't any winning and losing, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At first, they didn't have the thought of fighting, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The People's Liberation Army was also not fighting and we also didn't go to seize the place. Then they just stayed on guard.   

**Q:**  The cause of the fight was the weapons, right?   

**A:**  Yes. According to Tibetan customs, they would send pack animals ahead and I heard that they [the Tibetan soldiers] had stopped for a meal. When they heard that something happened down there, they just took the guns and went there. I should say that this was the small cause.   

**Q:**  I heard from many people that at that time the chiefs in Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས] and Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a>, had contacted you through letters and came to see you and said, "If the local [Tibetan] government would give us some more freedom and treat us equally, we will fight with you against the People's Liberation Army." Is this true or not?   

**A:**  I had the thought of opposing the CCP and they also had the same thought. The people who belonged to Tibet on this side of the Yangtze River didn't have anything to say to that. This was talk among the chiefs on the other side of the Yangtze who did not belong to us. There was some connection and there were all kinds of casual talks about uniting [Tib. གཅིག་སྒྲིལ].   

**Q:**  Didn't you formally talk about this?   

**A:**  No. There wasn't any discussion on this. But not really that we didn't have any talking. There was no talk to make war against the People's Liberation Army because they belonged to another province and we couldn't mobilize against them. But there was a close, friendly relation.   

**Q:**  So you kind of became closer, right?   

**A:**  All of us were close to each other and it was implied that if we would meet difficulties, we would unite. We couldn't announce [Tib. ཁྱབ་བསྒྲགས] this openly, but we were implying [Tib. མདོག་མདོག] we would do that. At this time, there was a Guomindang officer in Chamdo and he was also listening to the things that were going on because he was on the Guomindang side. [laughter] This was also not okay because he was not a representative and he just snuck in [Tib. ཤུལ་ཤུལ་ཤུལ་ལ་འཛུལ]. His name was Zuo Oyuan. He was there during the previous Doji's term before I got there. He used to come to me often and it was inconvenient to kick him out or leave him there. He was listening to what we were doing and we didn't trust him. So at that time, if the other provinces were to make a move, he was siding with the Guomindang and he was saying, "If all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> unite and report to the Guomindang, Tibet would kind of be merged together." This was his goal. I think if all the miser would have united, we would not have been able to do that unless we would have taken a pledge [Tib. གན་རྒྱ]. I just told him, "Just leave it, it is hard to do that." I was not that attentive of him and we didn't put that into action. We just talked about that.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] and Raga [Tib. རབ་དགའ] come to make relations with you?   

**A:**  They didn't come purposely. Abo Raga came once, but he came like a revolutionary to hold peace talks. He came after his area had been liberated. They might have [had] that thought, but it was very difficult. The soldiers of the local government didn't have good discipline and they had harmed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> in Kham in the past, and we couldn't make much an explanation, thinking that they might not believe in us. The chiefs were a little bit better, but it was hard to have an overall unity. So I didn't put that into action. If we would have [had] to put it into action, we [would] have [had] to talk with all the people in Sichuan Province. They were mainly concerned about planning to unite the areas in Sichuan Province. But, among them, there were many bandits and they had severe contradictions among themselves, so doing something with them was very complicated. And they did not trust each other and I couldn't handle those things. I knew that they had that hope, but if I had done that for the time being, there might have been a war. But there would have been a lot of trouble because they would [have] asked for a large quantity of weapons and we would have [had] to deliver the weapons to them. So that would have caused difficulties. If I could organize well, it would be good, but I couldn't do that. To tell you in short, they had shown this attitude, but we didn't put it into action.   

**Q:**  Did you discuss this with Lhasa?   

**A:**  No. I didn't tell the Kashag. If I could [have] put it into action, I would have told them. But since I couldn't put it into action, if I told Lhasa, they might have said that it was great so do it, and then I would have [had] trouble. There were many internal contradictions among the Khambas because they liked to fight.   

**Q:**  They have been fighting throughout history, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So I didn't know which path to go on to make unity. It was hard. Zuo Oyuan mobilized the people and he might have told the others like he also told me, "If all of you could have unity, the Tibetan Mongolian Office [Tib. བོད་སོག་ལས་ཁུངས] [of the GMD] will do that for you." This was probably just before Silling was liberated. The Lanzhou area was given to Ma Bufang, and later he lost the war in Lanzhou. They were thinking in that way. But as for us, it was not that easy and I found that I couldn't do that.   

**Q:**  I have some British documents in which it was written that in 1937 one British military officer went to Tibet and made a detailed plan on developing Tibetan soldiers. In that, one of the chapters said, "It is not good to just spread the soldiers on the one side of the Yangtze River because if the Chinese would attack, and if we didn't have reinforcements, that would not be good. It was better to have soldiers stationed in between the north and the south sides of the river, and station a regiment behind them. Then the regiment could support the soldiers and fight when the Chinese attack us." Did you see that plan?   

**A:**  No. I wasn't in the Kashag at this time, I was a tsipön.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: When I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གར་ཕྲུག་པ] The ceremonial dance troupe of the Dalai and Panchen Lamas. Young boys were conscripted via a corvée levy from serf/miser peasant families who were compensated for the loss of their son by a reduction in their other taxes. Such boys left their families and moved either to Lhasa or Shigatse.">gadrukpa</a>, you were a tsipön.   

**A:**  Yes. At that time you were young.   

**Q:**  The Tibetan [Government's] Military Headquarters, Magjigang, probably knew that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Normally, the Kashag and the Military Headquarters would make relations [connections]. When the issue became big, then the Drungtsi would hold an Assembly meeting. But this was the work that should be done by the government. So we would not know that.   

**Q:**  I have some questions about 1950. Ngabö came to Lhasa after Wang Qimei arrived and he brought the original 17-Point Agreement and gave it to the Kashag. And one day they had a discussion and said that Ngabö said that we should implement it. Do you recall this meeting?   

**A:**  This is correct.   

**Q:**  I heard that some of the kalön or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, I am not sure, which, didn't say right away that it would be accepted and just left it in between, like saying "I wonder what would it be like [Tib. ག་འདྲ་ཡིན་ན]?" After some time, Ngabö suggested, "Since the other kalön and the sitsab are not accepting it, we will have to hold the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> gyendzom." Tell me about this. This is very important.   

**A:**  It was something like that. The 17-Point Agreement was signed and after he came up, he told the Kashag that he had signed the Agreement. But to tell you frankly, at this time, the Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> would meet together. This was called the joint meeting of the kalön and the sitsab [Tib. སྲིད་བཀའ་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ]. Even though the Kashag was there, we had to report to the sitsab. The Kashag could not make the decisions. This was because the sitsab had held power while the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, and at this time, their power was kind of not taken away. Before reporting to the Dalai Lama, we had to go through the stares of the sitsab. So we talked with the sitsab and we also held a meeting. The kalön were smart, so they didn't openly oppose the 17-Point Agreement. And Lobsang Tashi was a little bit cool [Tib. བསིར་པོ] [smart]. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was strange and had the old fashioned brain, which was not flexible, like white is always white and black is always black [Tib. དཀར་གཅིག་ནག་གཅིག]. So he neither said that he would accept it nor that he would not. He was just saying, "I wonder what it would be like," and behaved kind of cavalier [Tib. འ་རི་འུ་རི].   

**Q:**  He probably conveyed some kind of doubt, right?   

**A:**  Yes, kind of doubt. Actually, the decision for the Agreement was made down there. They didn't ask him because they didn't have the time to ask. This was why <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was disappointed. But he couldn't say no to that. When the Kashag was keeping quiet like a statue, it became like having the same thought. I was also there [laughter], and I also kept quiet. I thought that if I said yes, he [Lukhangwa] would say something, and it was also not okay to say no.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: It probably took 2 months until the Dalai Lama sent the telegram, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it took 2 months.   

**Q:**  After that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> was held, right?   

**A:**  No, it was not held like this. When Ngabö told the Kashag [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: He had brought the original Agreement, right?   

**A:**  Yes he did, and he said, "It would not be okay if the Kashag would not give an answer and show their attitude towards the Agreement." The Kashag said, "We don't have much to say. We should hold the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> and a decision will be made."   

**Q:**  The Kashag also needed to have an excuse [Tib. ལག་པ་ཕྱིས་ས], right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Kashag didn't dare come out alone.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag say that?   

**A:**  It was not allowed to hold the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> if the Kashag didn't agree. A single person couldn't tell them to hold the Assembly meetings. So the Kashag agreed to hold the tsondu and we [Kashag] sent a report to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> saying, "We have to show our attitude towards the Agreement, so how about calling the tsondu?" The sitsab couldn't say that it was not allowed to hold the tsondu, so they approved holding the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> was not the Gyendzom that used to be held in Shabden Lhagang [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལྷ་ཁང] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, right?   

**A:**  No. It was the Hragdu gyepa. If we had to hold the real <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a>, all people had to attend.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</a> was held and they kind of accepted the Agreement and put forward some questions, like [about] the Military Administrative Committee. After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> made the decision, the telegram was sent to Mao Zedong. Zhang Jingwu and Fan Ming said that it would be good to send a telegram before the 1st of October. This was written in the article of Alo Buzhang. At this time it was probably the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, but it was said the Kashag sent a letter saying, "We can't send the telegram right away. At first we have some questions like, 'What is the Military Administrative Committee?' And we want Chamdo back and what about the Common Program [Ch. gong tong gang ling]? And we don't want many soldiers." So they told Zhang Jingwu to give written answers to these before we would send the telegram. Then we went to Alo Buzhang several times. Then they didn't send the telegram before the 1st of October. After sometime, the telegram was sent. What happened in between that? This is very important.   

**A:**  [laughter] I don't have much to say and I don't remember well. There was a little bit of talk. In between that, there wasn't any big trouble. At that time, the biggest trouble was [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  You didn't send the telegram right away, right?   

**A:**  It was sent soon after that and it didn't take much time. I forget the dates.   

**Q:**  It took one month?   

**A:**  I don't think so. I don't remember clearly. I think it was sent soon, because it was decided at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>. According to the Tibetan system, since the tsondu had decided, no matter if it was good or bad, the Kashag didn't have much ability to make corrections. The Kashag didn't have this freedom.   

**Q:**  But you have to ask the Dalai Lama about the minutes [Tib. ཚིག་ཐོ] of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, if it is the Dalai Lama and the regent, they have the power to give the order and ask questions to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> regarding the implementation. But the Kashag didn't have that power. The tsondu had a high level of authority. For example, if the tsondu said that they were going to overthrow a leader, they would overthrow him. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdün [Tib. གླང་མདུན] was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> and he was the colleague of the regent. But when they didn't get along well, the Kashag didn't make the decision and the tsondu made the decision. When he didn't get along well [with] Reting, Reting had made a comment and the tsondu kind of stood behind Reting and said that he was making it hard for Reting to work, so he should be removed. The next day, they went to the Kashag with the minutes. At that time I was the gandrön. They just said that he [Langdün] didn't have the job from [as of] tomorrow. If the Kashag would say something after the tsondu made the decision, then later when the tsondu said something, it was finished and they would accuse you of a crime. After the tsondu made the decision, the individual <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the kalön might ask some questions. In principle, if the tsondu made the decision, it was finished.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: It seems that it was not an individual question but it was the Kashag itself putting forward questions like those [about] the Common Program and the Military Administration Committee.   

**A:**  According to what you said, it seems that questions were put forward after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>. But this was not after the tsondu made the decision. The talk about the Common Program was before Ngabö arrived in Lhasa when the points of the Agreement were announced. And it was said that we didn't understand the Common Program, "Gongtong Gangling". Actually, this was the [Chinese draft] constitution, but the Tibetans didn't understand it. [laughter]   

**Q:**  What was Gongtong Gangling?   

**A:**  Tashi Tsering: Gong means common [Tib. ཐུན་མོང] Gangling means program [Tib. རྩ་འཛིན], which means a program that all people have to adhere to.   

**Q:**  According to Alo Buzhang's article, the Tibetans didn't have any choice but to accept the Agreement. But when the PRC told them to send the telegram right away, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> or the Kashag thought that if we talked about something that was not clear, we could take advantage and delay the telegram.   

**A:**  Yes, this was to push it.   

**Q:**  The important thing was that they told them to explain in detail the power and the duty of the Military Administration Committee, right?   

**A:**  This was not said by the Kashag as a whole. Regarding the questions, we might have said that, but I don't remember. We didn't discuss about taking advantage. If we said that, the talk would have been leaked out. The other kalön didn't say that, and I also didn't say that. Maybe a few members of the Kashag thought that and might have put forward the method. It is easy to put forward the method. If one says, "Maybe we don't need to hurry about this for few days." Then it is finished.   

**Q:**  Did you ever think of talking and about taking advantage?   

**A:**  No. I had a fault that I was too upright [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག]. I would say right away what was wrong and what was right, and I didn't think much about the method. I guess, if someone [would] have thought that, it might have been Surkhang. He was the one who thought the quickest [Tib. ཀླད་པ་བསིར་ཤོས].   

**Q:**  No, at that time, he was not there. He came to Lhasa in 1952 and this was in 1951.   

**A:**  Oh, he came back soon. He only stayed 6 months. If he was not there, there were no other people who would [have] dared to say that. Most of them were quite upright. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was upright and Liushar also. Next would be me, but I also didn't think about that. I was thinking that since the Agreement was there, it would be better to implement it and have good relations because the People's Liberation Army had already reached Lhasa. There was a possibility to get advantages if we had a good relations. If not, we would suffer a loss. Shasur and Thubden Ramyang were also upright and Thubden Ramyang was more upright. [Repeating Shasur's suggestion on showing full face]   

**Q:**  Who made the drafts of the telegrams? Was it the Kashag or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>?   

**A:**  After it was decided through the discussion of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the Kashag, the Kashag made it. Then we showed it to the sitsab, and then got the approval from the Dalai Lama and sent [it].   

**Q:**  Was it sent under the name of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time the most powerful were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was extremely insistent, so no one could challenge him.   

**Q:**  You asked many times about the Military Administrative Committee. What was the power and duty of the Military Administrative Committee? I still don't know. Though the Military Administrative Committee was set up, at that time there were three; the Tibetan government, the Military Administrative Committee and the Military Headquarters.   

**Q:**  What were the differences between their power and their duty?   

**A:**  We didn't know clearly about that. But at that time, when they explained, it was said that people from all parts, like the local government, Panchentsang [Panchen Lama] and people from Kham, and also the People's Liberation Army, were included in that. It was kind of [like] selecting representatives. All of their offices would be under it. It would be like the National People's Congress with people from all over. There was some discussion about who would be the heads of the Military Administrative Committee, but they didn't put it into action. Tibetans didn't understand it well and didn't like it because they thought the word military meant many soldiers would come to Tibet and press forcefully. So in its place, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up [in 1956]. It was probably to prepare [pave] the way for the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**Q:**  If the Military Administrative Committee was started, would the Tibetan soldiers have been incorporated under it?   

**A:**  Yes. It was like setting up the Tibet Autonomous Region. Even the Kashag would have had to get absorbed into it, like one ray would get absorbed by another one. If it had been implemented, it's main function would have been to implement the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  Was Chamdo included in the Military Administrative Committee?   

**A:**  Yes. It would be included if the Military Administrative Committee would have been set up. Before that, it was not included because it was already liberated. This was the point about which the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> fought saying, "Are you going to give Chamdo to us or not?" The Chinese said, "We can't say that for sure because we need unity." Since it was liberated, and the Liberation Committee [Tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] had also been set up, it would have been okay to say that we wanted Chamdo back. Although the Zhongyang was planning to give it back, the system had to be changed. Later, when the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, all of those were united together. Before the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, when I went for the visiting tour, they were making the regulations for the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**Q:**  There was a big meeting with the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, the kalön, Zhang Jingwu, Fan Ming, Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan about converting the Tibetan soldiers. And there was a big fight on that and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, "We got hit on the head in Chamdo and the blood has not dried yet so we can't convert the soldiers." Do you remember when that was?   

**A:**  It was at the end of 1951. The issue wasn't to convert the whole Tibetan Army into the Chinese Army. After we lost the war in Chamdo and all the soldiers of the 4 regiments there got scattered, Zhang Jingwu said, "The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> have had no work since the Chamdo War, and they have [had] a hard time with their livelihood because neither the local government nor the People's Liberation Army paid them a salary so it would be good if they were collected and were made to attend revolutionary studies, like about the Agreement, and Zhongyang will give them a salary." It may be that they would meet once a week and they would pay them the salary. Zhongyang probably thought of making it look kind of nice. It seems to me that this was something true that was said and this was right because they would get support for their livelihood no matter [whether] or not they would get the studies. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> didn't like it at all, the so called study. [laughter] And he said, "This won't do. It is not okay to say the word study because those people were the people who got their heads hit in Chamdo and the blood is still wet. How can they do the study?" He couldn't understand things well. That's why they got into a fight, because he talked about the example [head and the blood]. The Chinese responded that, "There is no sense in talking about the war. Soldiers on both sides were killed. So if you talk like this, then the difficulties will only increase." Lukhangwa apparently liked to read Gesar stories, so he quoted from the Gesar stories, "If you hit someone on the head with a golden statue, he will not get a blessing. If a relative insults you, you won't like it [Tib. 'mgo gser skus brdung na byin rlabs med/ dma' gnyen gyis phab na dga' rgyu med]." We had to keep quiet, because we couldn't say it was right. So he said this and the issue could not go forward. There were 8 of us including the kalön, the Katsab and the sitsab. We kalön didn't say yes, no, or anything.   

**Q:**  Was Fan Ming the one who responded to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>?   

**A:**  Fan Ming was the one [who] talked a little bit aggressively.   

**Q:**  I heard that Fan Ming said to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>, "You are someone creating conflict between the PRC and Tibet, and you are useless." Right?   

**A:**  He probably said it. Phundra [Tib. ཕུན་བཀྲ] was the translator. He will know. At these meetings we didn't take notes, so I don't remember well. My recollection may not be complete. But the main issue was not merging the armies, but reeducating the officers of the dispersed units.   

**Q:**  Was this after the big meeting about the Agreement?   

**A:**  Yes, it was probably after. After that meeting, we had a lot of meetings with the Chinese. We would sit face to face in a line. The leaders of the Tibet Work Committee [Ch. gong wei] like Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming [were] on one side, and we [were] led by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> on the other side. At first I was friendly with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>. But later we had a split. Lukhangwa had the big fight with the Chinese saying all kinds of things, and the kalön kept quiet since we thought whatever we would say would make the situation worse. Ngabö was there. So we didn't say anything either supporting the Chinese or Lukhangwa. So Lukhangwa was angry that we didn't support him, and the split started there. Then, after this, the Kashag had its own meeting. At this time, Shasur said, "If we support the sitsab's arguments, they were talking recklessly, but if we do not support what they say, then we are almost handing them over to the Chinese, implying that these two were the ones doing that [alone]. What should we do to solve this dilemma?" I was the younger of the kalön and my blood was probably kind of hot, and I also spoke what I thought, so I said, "If we follow the sitsab and charge forward, there will be big trouble. But it is not okay if we don't follow them. What we should do is to make a suggestion [Tib. གསལ་འདེབས] to the sitsab. Whatever we are going to say to the Chinese, we should first discuss it between us. After we settle on what to say internally, then we should say it to the Chinese. And if there are things the Kashag are doing that are wrong, the sitsab can criticize us. And if the sitsab are doing things wrong, then we will give you suggestions." When the question arose as to who would say this to them, I said, "I will say it." So I went since I used to work together with Lukhangwa in the Tsikhang. So I went to him and said all of this with sincere and loyal motives. "In the future, you should not suddenly say all kinds of things, but should first discuss them with the Kashag. If you say things suddenly, it is hard for the Kashag to support you." When I said this, he got really angry. He said, "I am an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> man. I am not going to listen to this. Whatever it is, I say it straight forwardly [without thought of future ramifications]." From this time on, Lukhangwa disliked me. I said this to help him, but he didn't listen and told me that he was an Amdo so he wouldn't do it. Later there were no discussions between the sitsab and the Kashag about strategy. Lukhangwa was someone who did stupid things [Tib. གླེན་རྟགས] without first thinking them through.   

**Q:**  It is the world's custom to first discuss policy and make the strategy internally, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I also have some understanding about the [Chinese communist] revolution and saw that the Chinese used to always discuss things. So I thought it would be good for us to do this as well, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> would have nothing of it. He might have thought that the subordinate was saying something to the superior.   

**Q:**  Why were the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> left in place after the Dalai Lama returned?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth, since the People's Liberation Army was coming, people were scared. And if there would be someone to stay here, then it would be okay for all the kalön to run away to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> with the Dalai Lama. Speaking according to the customs, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> should have been appointed from among the Kashag and this have made things stable. But they appointed others to stay and left <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> instead. I think all the kalön were thinking of themselves, so no one wanted to stay in Lhasa. I was a kalön, but at this time, they said I should stay in Giamda and they would send troops [Note: They did send some monk-fighters and the Drongdrag Regiment]. So I had to stay there. I was just going through the motions of staying there, but if we had to fight with the People's Liberation Army, I couldn't have even lasted a day. [laughter] When people asked what I was doing there, I said I was staying there like a guard. [laughter] I really thought in that way. I had 1-2,000 troops, but couldn't have really made a fight of it. When the Dalai Lama and the Kashag came back, there was no easy way to get the sitsab demoted.   

**Q:**  Couldn't they have told the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, "You did well, thank you. Now it is over?"   

**A:**  It was hard. Unless they would take the initiative [to resign], the Kashag didn't dare to tell the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, who were higher, to resign. Although they didn't want them to stay, they couldn't expel them. And the Dalai Lama was young and didn't understand things like this. There were also many kalön, since there were the 4 real and the 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a>, making 8.   

**Q:**  On October 1st, the Chinese said we had to carry the national flag or hoist it up. I heard that Fan Ming or Zhang Jingwu said the Tibetan flag was an English flag. And I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> gave a long explanation of the Tibetan flag at this time. Is this true?   

**A:**  Yes that happened. I was in the Kashag then. The People's Liberation Army said to the Kashag that the Tibetan Army should carry the Chinese national flag with 5 stars [Ch. wu xing] when they marched at the celebration. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, "We have our own flag with lions and snow mountains to carry." This fight between Lukhangwa and the Chinese wasn't face-to-face, it was told through the Kashag. We said this to the Chinese. In between, the Kashag acted smart and left the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> in the inner circle, and the Kashag advised the sitsab to give in a little bit on this. There was an explanation that the Tibetan flag wasn't an English flag. I'm not sure whether it was now or later, but it happened. It wasn't an English flag. It had the snow mountain and the snow lions symbolizing the joint Religion-Political [Tib. ཆོས་སྲིད་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ] [system] and 12 different colors symbolizing the 12 Tenma [Tib. སྟན་མ] deities. We didn't have the idea of a national flag. We called it the military flag [Tib. དམག་དར] and it was flown on top of the [Tibetan] Military Headquarters building or Magjigang. It wasn't flown on the top of the Potala. At this time, the old society was slightly disorganized because it was backward. But if I may say that that was bad, I was also among the ones who made that. So I can't say that that was bad. So they had to explain about the flag once, that this was a Tibetan flag, not a British one. We read that only once. For example, the 12 colors symbolize the 12 Tenma Deities of Tibet. The snow mountain symbolizes Tibet. The 2 lions were the joint religion and politics. []. We explained the flag and then we suggested a compromise that the Tibetan Army would carry both flags. This was accepted. [laughter] When we acted friendly with the People's Liberation Army, they were also making a few compromises. ].   

**Q:**  Was the Chinese flag hoisted on buildings?   

**A:**  No, it was carried when the army was marching in formation at ceremonies. []. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> said, "We will not carry the Chinese flag." The Chinese said, "You have to. Anyways, your flag is an English flag." When we explained that it was a Tibetan flag, Zhongyang regarded this as the local flag. So we were the middle men in this dispute. Finally, the compromise was worked out by the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Did the People's Liberation Army carry the Tibetan flag?   

**A:**  They didn't. The People's Liberation Army probably did not carry flags when they marched in formation.   

**A:**  Another person speaking: They would carry the military flag with the words 8.1 [Ch. ba yi].   

**Q:**  In 1951, when Zhang Guohua was coming close to Tibet, they said that they wanted a lot of grain. I think the Tibetan government had many grain storage granaries [Tib. བཀར་འཇུག] and they could have helped the Chinese for a year or so. But the Tibetan government didn't really help the Chinese. Was this true?   

**A:**  In accordance with the Agreement, the Kashag had to help the Chinese. At this time, the Kashag was considering helping a little bit. At that time, they [the Chinese] couldn't talk with the Tibetan government easily because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were there. The Chinese told me to sell some grain privately, and I sold 10,000-20,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley, and they were paying the current price of the grain.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: It cost 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> for a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley, right?   

**A:**  Not in the beginning. When the People's Liberation Army first came, it was 25 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> for a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley. At this time, most of the grain stores were in the hands of the three feudal lords, the three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མངའ་བདག; ch. 领主] Feudal lord, manorial estate holders, serf-owners.">ngadag</a>, so when they knew that the People's Liberation Army was buying grain, they raised the price like traders. At that time, there were three cadres of the Finance Office and they came to ask me how they should manage the livelihood of people regarding buying grain. I told them, "You will have hardships with the grain in the future. It is definite that the price will go up. So you should buy a very large amount now so that you will be more self sufficient. If you buy a little quantity, the price will go up monthly." At this time, the price rose fast. First it quickly rose to 50 sang. Then to 60 and they could buy a large amount when the price was under 100 sang. I also sold for 60 sang. I also encouraged friends to sell grain to the Chinese and it was paid at the current [asking] price. Then after this, the price rose to 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> (200 ngüsang).  

**A:**  In 1958-59, we were able to take action to decrease the price of grain. When we did according to old system, we were unable to decrease it, though we gave [provided] some relief grain and sold a little bit of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and did those things. The grain price was going up rapidly. The Chinese told the local government to help them. The Kashag reported to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> that the price of grain was rising a lot. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said to the Chinese, "Do you have hardship with grain?" They said yes. Then he said, "Is it worse to lose a war or to go hungry?" [laughter] He just provoked the other people to get [them] angry.   

**Q:**  When did he say that?   

**A:**  At the end of 1951. This kind of talk was meant to make the other person angry, but there was no way the Kashag could control him.   

**Q:**  Was that after the Tsondu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said to Ngabö after the Agreement was signed, "Yes, you did this. You made your country dark and made the other people's country filled with light rays [Tib. རང་ཡུལ་མུན་པར་བཏང། མི་ཡུལ་འོད་ཀྱིས་རྒྱང]."   

**A:**  [laughter] No. I haven't heard this. He didn't say it in the Kashag while I was there. He might have said that when I was at the Grain Office [from the middle of 1952 onwards]. We helped the Chinese a bit with grain. But the Kashag was not able to help the Chinese a lot. Just some. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> is from Phembo, so he reads the Gesar story a lot. So he was kind of engrossed with heroes and fighters. He didn't act or dress like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and his clothes were dirty. He didn't fix his belt right. He dressed like an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> person. He was very conservative [Tib. རྙིང་ཞེན་ཆེན་པོ].   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> is very famous in foreign countries and he is the best hero. But I think that he acted a little bit wrong. What do you think of his behavior? Was it beneficial for Tibet when he opposed the [Chinese] right away? On one side, the Military Administration Committee was not set up and there was no merging of the army, and the democratic reforms were not done right away. So when we look at [it] from one side, it was okay that he opposed [the reforms] right away. On the other side, if the Chinese and the Tibetans were not friendly, it would be hard to live together. Since he helped the People's Association and caused the disturbance, Tibet suffered the loss in the long run.   

**A:**  I don't know much about the long run, but his behavior caused a lot of trouble, and at that time, I didn't like trouble. [laughter] And I thought that it was not good. I thought things should be done peacefully [gently] and that this way would be beneficial for Tibet. The more we were confrontational, the worse it became. This was the character of the People's Liberation Army. So I tried to help the Chinese through advice and selling grain, so I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> thought I was pro-Chinese.   

**Q:**  The Labrangs, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, also sold a lot of grain.   

**A:**  Later, they bought a large amount at once from everywhere. At that time, I also liked the old government and I didn't have any revolutionary thoughts. But when I was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> [in 1959], I couldn't do the magji well because there were many contradictions between the magji. While being magji, I was demoted and they suspected that I was pro-Chinese. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> also probably might have thought that. But, nowadays, people are saying that I was the revolt magji [Ch. pan luan si ling]. So I also regard myself as a magji [laughter] because it doesn't make any difference because it was history.   

**Q:**  So both sides suspected you, right?   

**A:**  Yes, from this side, of course they would suspect [me] because they are old [fashioned]. The People's Liberation Army might have suspected me, but they would not imply that they suspect me. But Tibetans openly showed the appearance [their suspicion].   

**A:**  At the end of 1951, how much grain was there in the grain storages under the government's control if they really wanted to help the Chinese?   

**A:**  In the past, the storehouses had several hundred thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain. Now I have to tell you clearly, and I don't need to be afraid of anybody. But in 1951, there were only about several ten thousand khe of grain because at the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, there was a large amount of grain because he was the owner. And he started the Babshi Office and imposed a large amount of Bashi grain [tax] for paying the military salary. At this time, there was so much grain that the storage houses could not hold it, and it was said that the storage walls were breaking. But after he died, during the regents, this grain was lent to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> or cheaply sold to them. The regents are not only to be blamed, they just gave approval. But some of the kudrak were making their own profit, and some of the kudrak and traders who had connections with the Kashag told the government to lend or sell grain to them. This was like going through the back door. In this way, a large amount of grain was sold. They bought it at a cheap price and sold if for a profit in the market. Some took it as a loan and made a good turn over with it, and some converted it into money and paid it. In this way, the grain of the local government had a great loss.   

**Q:**  This was during the two terms of regents, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On top of the Kashag door there was a plank on which it was written, "The flourishing development of political affairs [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་བྱེད་སྒོ་ལྷག་པར་འཕེལ་བ]." Finally, the people stuck a poster under that plank saying, "Giving the flourishing grain banquet [Tib. འབྲུ་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྟོན་མོ་ལྷག་པར་སྤེལ་བ]." Here grain banquet means that they were giving out grain. When this poster was stuck up, the Kashag had to take it dowm.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  I think it was about the time the two regents were switched, about 1940. So when the People's Liberation Army first came, there wasn't much grain in reserves. If we emptied all the storerooms, there would have been only about 100,000 khe. That's why there wasn't much grain left, if I don't explain this, people might wonder how the grain vanished.   

**Q:**  In the past, there must be several hundred thousand, right?   

**A:**  In the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, there were several hundred thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a>. Just before the liberation and after the poster was stuck up, the local government took out 100,000 khe of grain for military salaries [Tib. འབུམ་འབྲུ]. From this, it shows that there were several hundred thousand khe before that.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  It was in 1948-49. Later, I don't think that there was 100,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain left. Probably not.   

**Q:**  How much grain was sold to the People's Liberation Army?   

**A:**  I don't know clearly because I was not working on that.   

