# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0002.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein, Tashi Tsering and Trindor  
**Name:** Lhalu, Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 79  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] was a Kalön and was also the Governor-General of Chamdo (the Doji) in 1950. In this interview, he briefly discusses grain sales to the Chinese in 1951-52.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0002_04/H_0002_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I really don't know how much they sold. The Kashag helped them, but not energetically. It was not okay not to sell it. How much I can't say.   

**Q:**  In 1951 were there about 10,000 People's Liberation Army [soldiers]?   

**A:**  I don't know clearly. It was top secret.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: If we guess, there were probably not many, right? We could see that the soldiers who are now at the border hadn't come at that time.   

**A:**  Yes, but I think it was approximately between 10,000 and 20,000, because at this time it was very difficult to feed the soldiers. If they brought too many troops, there was no grain.   

**Q:**  They couldn't transport the [grain] from down there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The reason why we didn't put much effort into selling grain was because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> told them, "We don't have much grain for ourselves. So we can't help a lot." And he put forward those bad proverbs. So we didn't support them energetically, but we did a little.   

**Q:**  Thank you very much.   

