# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0016.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Chödrak Trüku [Tib. ཆོས་གྲགས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Darjeeling, , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Chödrak Trüku [Tib. ཆོས་གྲགས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 52  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1937  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chödrak Trüku Rimpoche was originally from Traya in Kham where he was discovered to be an incarnate lama. After studying in his monstery in Traya, at age 15, he came to Lhasa and joined Drepung Monastery's Loseling College and Nyare Khamtsen [Tib. ཉག་རེ་ཁང་ཚན]. In this interview, he discusses how he was recognized as a reincarnation of Chödrak and how he was raised as a result. He talks about his trip to Lhasa, his arrival at the monastery and how he managed while there.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0016_01/M_0016_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell me about how were you recognized as an reincarnation of Chödrak? When you were recognized as a trüku how old were you? When did you join in Drepung and how did you come to Drepung and tell me the story?   

**A:**  The fourth recarnation of Chödrak counting backwards from me was known as Chödrak Trigen Rimpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་རྒན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and the people in Traya were very grateful to him. He found the Gyüdra Tömey [Tib. rgyud dgrwa stod smad] monasteries/colleges in Traya and lived until his 60s. He was very successful and gave many teachings in Traya. Joge lama Yeshe Wangdrak [Tib. འཇོ་དགེ་བླ་མ་ཡེ་ཤེས་དབང་གྲགས] was one of his disciples. In Joge hermitage, there was a statue of Trigen Rimpoche. His reincarnation died in the monastery when he was 22 years old. He and the tutor to the Dalai Lama, Kyabje Ling Rimpoche [Tib. སྐྱབ་རྗེ་གླིང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] were in the same grade. The reincarnation died from arthritis. Between that, there was one lama who they took to the monastery and he died on the way when he was very young. I think he was three years old. After that, I was born. When I was a baby, they took care of me.   

**Q:**  How did they do that?   

**A:**  My parents told me that usually in our house, one of the Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ] Lamas who is from Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ] would come to our house every year to perform the yearly ritual. One year, he told the household to keep his drum and said, "Keep this drum for me. I won't be using this drum for a quite while." My mother told me that on the day I was born, the water boiling on the stove turned white like milk. When I was born, it was winter. When the nomads went to fetch water they found that there were three yellow flowers on the surface of water. After that, my mother had labor pains and just before I was born, the drum made a sound by itself. This is what I heard from my parents. After that, Gonjo Dronden [Tib. འགྲོ་འདྲེན] Monastery said that I was the reincarnation of their late lama because the lama gave the drum to our household and some other reasons. The chandzö of the Chödrak Labrang [Tib. བླ་བྲང] said according to the divination of the Lama Yeshe Wangdrak [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་དབང་གྲགས ] and Ari Rimpoche, I was the reincarnation of Chödrak Rimpoche and my mother and I were brought to the Labrang by force. In the meanwhile, the labrang submitted a report asking for divination by the regent, and they sent a representative of their Labrang to Lhasa. Until that representative came back, they kept me and my mother like hiding us in the labrang. However, if my mother stayed with me, there was nobody working at home, so from my infancy, my servant named Sögyal [Tib. བསོད་རྒྱལ] took care of me like my mother. I remember these things a little bit. After they received the order from the government approving me as the reincarnation of Chödrak, they took care of me. Otherwise, I would have become a Nyingma Lama.   

**Q:**  If you were a Gelugpa Lama, when you lost your celibacy, then people will look down on you but if you were a Nyingma then it doesn't matter, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I stayed in the Labrang since my childhood. Then I went to see the Joge Lama Rimpoche and he is the one who cut the tuft of my hair that is left on my shaved head for becoming a monk [Tib. སྐྲ་འཕུད]. And the Lama Arab Rinpoche gave me the name Thutob Tenzin [Tib. མཐུ་བསྟོབ་བསྟན་འཛིན]. I think I was 4-5 years old then. They said that I need a pecha gegen (teacher for reading texts) and they asked for the divination and Gen Tsering Gyatso [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་རྒྱ་མཚོ] became my pecha gegen. Arab Rimpoche taught me first the Tibetan alphabet and after that, he taught me how to read. After that, I learned by heart the prayers of the protective deities and the scriptures of Sangde Jigsum [Tib. གསང་བདེ་འཇིག་གསུམ]; Sangwa Düpa [Tib. གསང་བ་འདུས་པ], Dechog [Tib. བདེ་མཆོག] and Jigje [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] in my native homeland. When I was 15 years old, I came to the Drepung Monastery.   

**Q:**  You came to monastery when you were 15 years old?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, the Chinese had already came to Lhasa, but they hadn't built the motorable road yet [so it was between 1951-1954]. So we had to travel riding horses and mules. It took one month to reach Lhasa.   

**Q:**  At that time, how many horses did you have?   

**A:**  We had 6 muleteers and my chandzö (manager) Loten [Tib. བློ་བསྟན]   

**Q:**  What is the name of Loten's relative?   

**A:**  His name is Champa [Tib. བྱམས་པ]. He went to Lhasa ahead of us. He died 4 years ago. There were 6 muleteers and Gen Loten going with me.   

**Q:**  You had your servant (söpön [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན]) with you, right?   

**A:**  There was no special söpön for me. Gen Loten was the söpön and also the chandzö.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa, did you come with only your own people or were there many people together in a group?   

**A:**  I came only with the people of the labrang. When we left for Lhasa, my parents and many other people came to see us off.   

**Q:**  How many days did they stay when they came to see you off?   

**A:**  My family members and my söpön in the Labrang came to see us off to a distance of two days and two nights. Other people came to see us off to one days distance. We had to pitch tents at night. Then we came to the monastery. At first, we stayed in the small house in Senge Shar [Tib. སིང་གེ་ཤར] which is located in Lubug [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay in Senge Shar?   

**A:**  You were staying on this side and I was on the other side. We stayed there for three days. I think they were looking for an auspicious special day for (us to)give the donggo ceremony. In Drepung, the former Chödrak Lama had staying in Khangsar [Tib. ཁང་གསར] where the late Lochöde [Tib. བློ་ཆོས་སྡེ] stayed. There was a very good lama who was from our homeland in Bompora [Tib. སྤོམ་པོ་ར] Khamtse. He was called Gen Jamyang Chöndze [Tib. རྒན་འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཆོས་མཛད]. He said, "If you stay in Khangsar, it would be too far away from the chöra (the debating grove) and you will waste your time." So he told the main khamtsen that we need a shag (apartment). When Gen Loten tried to get a shag from the main khamtsen, on the top of the khamtsen there was a shag that belonged to Traya Kyamgön Rimpoche [Tib. བྲག་གྱབ་སྐྱབ་མགོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. Under that, the shag belonged to Chungtsang [Tib. ཆུང་ཚང] Rimpoche. So there was no other shag.   

**Q:**  So you stayed on the second floor on top of the khamtsen gegen's shag, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this shag was for the senior monks. So the senior monks were saying that they don't want to give the shag to us. Later, we told the tsondu and the tsondu gave us two shag and they destroyed the walls in between and made it into one (larger) shag.   

**Q:**  Then what did you do?   

**A:**  At that time, in the khamtsen, Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང] and Ngawang Phüntso [Tib. ངག་དབང་འཕུན་ཚོགས] were the better ones on pecha. So we asked for divination to Chungtsang Rimpoche and he said that Gen Tashi Tsering would be better. So my pecha gegen was Tashi Tsering.   

**Q:**  Do you remember when you came to monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, I do.   

**Q:**  How did you come to the monastery?   

**A:**  I came to the monastery in a simple manner. I rode a horse and Gen Loten also rode a horse and the other servants came by walking.   

**Q:**  Was there any reception for you?   

**A:**  The main reception was held in Lhasa. The khamtsen received us at the stone floor and the khamtsen gegen came to see me with few monks.   

**Q:**  Did they pitch a tent when they received you?   

**A:**  No, the khamtsen gegen led me holding an incense holder (pöna [Tib. སྤོས་སྣ]) in his hand and first we had to go to the shag. The khamtsen offered tea and droma dresi [Tib. གསོལ་ཇ་བཞེས་འབྲས]. Then I had to go to have the "new one's audience" [Tib. གསར་མཇལ] to the abbot (khembo).   

**Q:**  You mean on that same day?   

**A:**  Yes, we came early in the morning.   

**Q:**  When you were there, the khembo was Pema Rigdzin [Tib. པད་མ་རིག་འཛིན], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did the khembo say?   

**A:**  I don't remember what he said. Then we offered the traja (college prayer assembly) in the tratsang and I had to go to tsog (the prayer assembly)with one söpön.   

**Q:**  Was that the next day?   

**A:**  Yes, it was on the next day when I got admitted in the monastery (chöshug [Tib. ཆོས་ཞུགས]). At that time, Gen Loten asked me, "How much gye (alms) are you going to offer?" I said I will offer 10 sang. So he agreed to that. Gen Loten might have been thinking that I might say that I wanted the rank of a tsogchen trüku (the highest level of incarnation). I didn't say that I wanted the rank of tsogchen trüku. After that, I joined the tsog and I sat on the front-most part of the tratsang because I offered the highest gye.   

**Q:**  What about Samdong [Tib. ཟམ་གདོང]?   

**A:**  Samdong was sitting below me. Just before the war began, the fat lama from Lhopa Khamtsen with a moustache offered more gye than I did. Probably, he offered 15 sang. So then he sat before me. He just stayed for one or two months and then went back to his homeland. During the Mönlam, it was very bad because the tsogchen trüku would come later.   

**Q:**  They would push, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and this was the place where we fight. It was very hard then.   

**A:**  Then what did you do?   

**A:**  After we supplied the traja and gave the feast to the uchö of the tratsang [The Umdze (chant/prayer leader) and the Gegö (disciplinary head of a tratsang)], the representatives of the government who was a tsidrung came over. I remember that I had to stand on the throne and he gave me the blessing ribbon [Tib. སྲུང་མདུད] and a khata from the Dalai Lama. They did this even though I was not a tsogchen trüku. I don't know the reason. And then the umdze and the gegö came to seek blessings from me and they offered me khata scarves.   

**Q:**  Did the khembo come to offer you a khata?   

**A:**  No, the khembo didn't come. After that, in order to bring good luck, the khembo taught me a little Düdra. On that day, I had to join the chöra(debate grove) and recite what I learnt on that day. I had to debate for the thamja [Tib. དམ་བཅའ] where I answered the questions. At that time, I had to take a söpön with me. After a few days, I had to serve tea in the khamtsen, the tsomja, together with a rice gruel thukpa [Tib. མིང་བཏགས]. That's how I got admitted into the monastery.   

**Q:**  Do you remember how many monks there were in Nyare Khamtsen?   

**A:**  I think there were more than 500 monks.   

**Q:**  Do you remember how much gye you offered?   

**A:**  I don't remember how much gye I offered. I just remember that we offered one khata for each monk.   

**Q:**  From this point, we two have the same story, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was nothing new, but when we were in the monastery, it was the time when it was a little hard.   

**Q:**  How hard was that when you were new in the monastery?   

**A:**  When I first came to the monastery, I felt it was quite hard because everything was new for me and I didn't know any one in the monastery and I didn't have anybody to talk to.   

**Q:**  When you came to the monastery, Traya Rimpoche was already there, right?   

**A:**  Rimpoche had come one year before.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  At that time, Traya Rimpoche and Tongden Rimpoche [Tib. རྟོག་ལྡན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] were there.   

**Q:**  Tongden Rimpoche came to the monastery before you?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I think Tongden was also staying in the khamtsen, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was my neighbor.   

**Q:**  So the second floor belonged to the two of you, right?   

**A:**  On the other side where the Shri Devi's chamber [Tib. ལྷ་མོའི་རྟེན་མཁར]] was located, there were two shag and one belonged to Lobsang Wangdra [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དབང་གྲགས] and the other shag belonged to Gen Changchup [Tib. rgan byang 'chup].   

**Q:**  Gen Changchup is related to Gen Gyurmey [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  Gen Loten stayed with me for awhile and then he went to India to do trade. When he came back, the Chinese vehicle had already arrived in Tibet. So he sold his mules in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How many mules did he have?   

**A:**  I think he had three lag [Tib. ལག] [1 lag = 10 mules]. Gen Loten sold his three lag of mules to Atrug lama [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག་བླ་མ].   

**Q:**  Atrug Lama, the one who was a Military Officer [Tib. དམག་དཔོན] in the Chushigandru?   

**A:**  He became a Military Officer later. Gen Loten used the money he got from selling the mules and bought goods from India. He took some goods to his native land using Chinese vehicles.   

**Q:**  So he didn't come back?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. He tried to come back again before the war (1959). If he came in winter, I think he could have come to Lhasa before the Mönlam Festival began. He said that he doesn't want to come in vehicles and he want to come after the mules in summer. He was planning to give the Geshe donggo and he had already packed his things. But after Mönlam, the fighting began. The Chinese made Gen Loten suffer very severely and he died from starvation.   

**Q:**  So you and Champa were alone in the khamtsen because Gen Loten went to India and then to his native land, right?   

**A:**  I and Champa and Gen Tashi Tsiring [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤི་ཚི་རིང] were there.   

**Q:**  So the expenditure for Tashi Tsering was taken care of by Chödrak Labrang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  How did you manage your expenses?   

**A:**  We had a little bit left by Gen Loten and my main expenditure was spent from the phog (monk's salary) and gye (alms). Usually, in the monastery I would hand over whatever phog and gye to my gegen (teacher) and he would do the shopping. My gegen and the three of us would eat together.   

**Q:**  So your gegen was also your chandzö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. My gegen didn't need to spend whatever phog and gye that he got. He could save his phog and gye and use them for his clothing only.   

**Q:**  Normally, the phog and gye would not be enough for living, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to lend out money in Lhasa and we could collect the interest from that.   

**Q:**  How much money did you lend in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I think it was about 500-600 dotse.   

**Q:**  So, the money was lent to different households and you collected the interest every year, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we used the interest for living.   

**Q:**  Anyway, he left you people enough money, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Chödrak Labrang was said to be very big and rich and it was an old labrang, but there were not many people, right? Were there many people in it in your native land?   

**A:**  In my native land there was my chandzö, a söpön and two cooks and two water fetcher, that's all.   

**Q:**  So the monastery is separate from the labrang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The monastery belonged to Chödrak Labrang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the owner of the monastery is Chödrak Labrang. All the Traya area did not belonged to Chödrak Labrang. But, Lashi Khamtsen [Tib. la zhi ?] and Kyitö [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད] Monastery belonged to Chödrak Labrang.   

**Q:**  What is name of the monastery?   

**A:**  It is called Kyitö Monastery. Kyitö Monastery belonged to the siddhi called Drubtop Nyagse Rinchen [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཉག་སེ་རིན་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  At the time of Longdöl Lama [Tib. ཀློང་རྡོལ་བླ་མ], there was a lama called Nyagre Chödrak. Were these two the same lama?   

**A:**  I think they were the same. Kyabje Trijang [Tib. སྐྱབ་རྗེ་ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche said, "Chödrak Rimpoche gave the Lamrim Teaching and saved the teaching lineage when it was almost getting broken off." I don't know in detail.   

**Q:**  Were there any things happened when you were in the monastery? Studying pecha, going to the chöra and giving the donggo were the usual things to do, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Beside that, were there any other things that happened to you?   

**A:**  I remember that one funny thing happened. Normally, when they would serve traja (Tratsang's tea), they would do the dedication, Ngowa [Tib. བསྔོ་བ]. Sometimes, when the tsogchen trüku and the khempo didn't come to join the tsog and even if the tsogchen trüku came to join in the tsog prayer assembly, some of them were young. The dedication should be done by the tratsang trüku. I was sitting at the head among the tratsang trüku, so I had to do the dedication and I was very afraid.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  I felt very shy.   

**Q:**  Hadn't you said the dedication many times?   

**A:**  I had been saying it several times. I took the novice vow, getsül from the khembo (abbot). Pomda [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] Rimpoche and I were dharma friends [Tib. ཆོས་གྲོགས] which means we took the vows together.   

**Q:**  When you came to the monastery, had the Traya Lama's trouble already occurred?   

**A:**  Yes, when I came to the monastery the Traya Lama's trouble was over and there was nothing.   

**Q:**  When you were in the monastery, was there Chungtsang Rimpoche?   

**A:**  Yes, Chungtsang Rimpoche was there. The most happiest period was when they would perform the ritual for bringing luck and good fortune called yangdrup [Tib. g.yang sgrup] in the khamtsen, right? During that time, we don't have to study pecha and there was good food served.   

**Q:**  You also played around and it was a very happy time, right?   

**A:**  Ye. Once I did the umdze job for the yangdrup.   

**Q:**  Gen Ngawang Phüntso [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཕུན་ཙོགས] and Gen Ngawang Tseten [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཚེ་བརྟན] would take good responsibility for the yangdrup, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in my native land it was very popular to do the yangdrup and we would chant a very good tone when praying the prayers to the deity of wealth, namse [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས].   

**Q:**  Did anything happen when you were in the monastery? When you came to the monastery, Chushigandru was not set up, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it wasn't set up when I came to the monastery.   

**Q:**  Do you remember what happened after Chushigandru was set up?   

**A:**  I heard that Chushigandru was set up and they requested the Dalai Lama for the Kalachakra Initiation [Tib. དུས་འཁོར་དབང་ཆེན] and they offered the golden throne.   

**Q:**  At that time, where were you?   

**A:**  At that time, I was in the monastery.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to Yadong, were you in the monastery?   

**A:**  At that time, I was not in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Before the Kalachakra when Chushigandru was planning to offer the golden throne, where were you?   

**A:**  At that time I was in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Do you remember where you heard that they were planing to offer the golden throne?   

**A:**  People were saying that they were building the golden throne.   

**Q:**  Since Gen Loten was not in there, nobody would tell you about these things, right?   

**A:**  At that time, I was new and I had to be scared of Gen Tashi Tsering although he was a very good person. At the time of the Kalachakra, we pitched a tent on the pasture Kyangthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ག] near Norbulinga. During the daytime, we went to receive the teaching.   

**Q:**  Were there many people with you?   

**A:**  At that time, there was my gegen, my söpön, Tashi Dargye [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དར་རྒྱས], Champa [Tib. བྱམས་པ] and me.   

**Q:**  I remember that we two stayed in one tent in Jarag [Tib. སྦྱར་རག]. right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, we were receiving the teaching on Bedön Künsel [Tib. སྦས་དོན་ཀུན་གསལ] from Tri Rinpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ].   

**Q:**  He also gave the teaching on Drepa Sherab [Tib. འགྲེལ་པ་ཤེས་རབ]   

**A:**  At that time, we stayed in Jarag.   

**Q:**  I forgot about that. Traya Rimpoche also stayed in the tent, right?   

**A:**  Was this at that time?   

**Q:**  I remember that I stayed in a house in Jarag also?   

**A:**  I remember that we stayed in a house and I don't think we stayed in a tent. Probably, I didn't receive the teaching Drepa Sherab [Tib. འགྲེལ་པ་ཤེས་རབ]. He also gave a teaching on the Yamantaka, jigje [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད].   

**Q:**  No, he didn't give the teaching on Yamantaka.   

**A:**  He gave the teaching on the Yamantaka, jigje [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] and it was said that the scripture is very rare.   

**Q:**  The scripture was called Rabe [Tib.?]. Were you there when he gave the teaching in the stable?   

**A:**  I was there. It was said that the scripture was borrowed from Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] and it was said it was the only one left in Tibet.   

