# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0310.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Gen Thuwang [Tib. རྒན་ཐུབ་དབང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Trindor  
**Name:** Gen Thuwang [Tib. རྒན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 58  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1933  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gen Thuwang [Tib. རྒན་ཐུབ་དབང] was a student at the Tse Labdra who later became a tsidrung. In this interview, he discusses becoming a tsidrung and then going to the Jitso Labdra. He also talks about how and why he went to China on a tour in 1953, and then how he stayed there to study and teach Tibetan for several decades.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0310_02/H_0310_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:** I don’t understand this. You stayed in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra school for 6 years, right?  

**A:** Yes.   

**Q:**  And then, after some time, you submitted the application and they agreed to allow you to become a Tsidrung, right?  

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After you became a Tsidrung, did you have any work assignments, like going to this or that office?   

**A:**  We would also have to use methods (such as giving bribes. etcetera). Somebody would be sent to this office and somebody would be sent to other places. However, there wasn’t enough time for me to be sent like this. In the beginning, they were planning to send me to the House Building Office [Tib. ཨར་པོའི་ལས་ཁུངས]. I was also going to the Jitso <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> school.   

**Q:**  When you went to the Jitso <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> School, did you have to ask the Yitsang for permission?   

**A:**  By that time, who the hell would ask for permission. The situation had already become chaotic. Nobody would ask for permission. If you asked, they would say no. [laughter] It was called Jitso <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> because later on there were all different kinds of people studying in it, like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and others also. (Trindor:) At that time, all of the disorderly [Tib. ཆ་བེ་ཆོ་བེ] Lhasan people went there.   

**Q:**  It was located at the Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག], right? (Trindor:) It was located at the place where Tibet University [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ] is now located.   

**A:**  It was called the Tibetan Cadre’s School [Ch. zang gan xiao]. Since we were there by ourselves, we were taught in tents because there were no houses then and there wasn’t the name Jitso <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> School. It came to be named that later on. After I went to China, more people came and it was named the Jitso labdra. When we were there, they taught us about 2 hours a day, and mainly they taught the Chinese language and characters. I was planning to go to school in China and thought it wouldn’t be all right if I didn’t learn a little Chinese before going to China.   

**Q:**  How did you know that a school was being established and how did you get the idea to go to the new school?   

**A:**  There was one person named Lhalung Surji Lodor La [Tib. ལྷ་ལུང་ཟུར་སྤྱི་བློ་རྡོར་ལགས] who is related to Rongdrag [Tib. རོང་བྲག] [an aristocratic family]. He was going there and he told me that there was such a school like that, and that he was going there. Then I kind of decided on the spot [Tib. ཁ་འཁྲོག] and decided to go there. We heard that there was a teacher called Teacher Han who spoke Tibetan well and taught Chinese in Tibetan. Otherwise, nobody gave any order to go there. They also didn’t tell people that we had a school and to come and learn. Later, it was gradually enlarged. Why did they call it jitso ("society")? It means that nobody established the school, and that people in the society just came there and told them to teach us. (Trindor:) Later the government paid a salary [to the students].   

**Q:**  Did they?   

**A:**  When we were there, there was no salary, but later it became very big. Before I went to China, my Chinese teacher went back [to China]. He spoke fluent Tibetan and in the past he used to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཚུལ] 1. The novice vows that Buddhist monks and nuns take. 2. A monk who has taken such vows.">getsül</a> monk. Later, a group called the Cultural Group [Ch. wen hua tuan; Tib. རིག་གནས་ཚོགས་པ] came. It was just after the liberation and the situation was chaotic [Tib. ཟིང་བྱང་ཞེ་དྲག་ཡོད་རེད]. Some intellectuals were dressed in soldiers' uniforms. We only knew that there were some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> soldiers who spoke Tibetan, but actually there was a group who had studied Tibetan Culture and they were all great scholars. The younger brother of Teacher Yu Daoquan, who was called Yu Shenyu, was there. He would wear glasses and later he died. I would think that he was a very high official. He was in a soldier’s uniform and was our teacher. He would always ask us about the meanings of Tibetan terms like yin red yod, etcetera. And like, I went past tense [Tib. ཕྱིན་པ་ཡིན], and I am going present tense [Tib. འགྲོ་གི་ཡིན] and I am sure he went [Tib. ཕྱིན་ཤག]. Also the difference between maybe it is [Tib. ཡིན་མདོག་ཁ་པོ་རེད], and probably and it was [Tib. ཡིན་པ་རེད]. Later, I came to know he was collecting these things. Later when I went to China, we were working in the same office. Now I realize that they had come to study culture and there were all different people in the group. Later he composed a book regarding the systems of Tibetan spoken language. From that time he had been collecting materials.   

**Q:**  At that time, how were you making your living?   

**A:**  As for making a living, I had a maternal uncle at home.   

**Q:**  Were you living with your uncle?   

**A:**  Yes. Later on my uncle became the head of the Post Office [Tib. སྦྲག་སྤྱི]. The post man was called drsgba [Tib. སྦྲག་པ]. Later, he became the Gyantse Pejö Khembo [Tib. རྒྱལ་རྩེ་དཔལ་ཆོས་མཁན་པོ] [the abbot of the famous monatery in Gyantse]. When the revolt took place, he might have been involved in the revolt, so he went there [India]. However, since I was in China, I didn’t get anything from my home. (Trindor:) It means he joined the revolt.   

**A:**  Yes. Later, the Prefecture Committee [Tib. ས་ཁུལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] of Dechen Rabten [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་རབ་བརྟན] sent me a letter saying that I was like that [related to him]. So I didn’t response and kept quite, thinking that it would not be good to response to them. [laughter] So I didn’t get anything from there.   

**Q:**  Tell me something about 1951 and 1952, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> came to Lhasa and the Dalai Lama went back to Lhasa from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> a new chapter started. What did the teachers and the students of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra and your friends think about these events?   

**A:**  There were only two different kinds of thoughts. One group of people were thinking that the so called revolution was very good and that in the future, the livelihood of the poor people would improve and they would make the rich and poor equal. And this would be very good. Another group of people were thinking that in the future they would make it very bad. Not only in Tibet, but when they liberated China, they had the same thing. Like saying if a person had some good things, like extra clothes, the Communists would take off their extra clothes and they would wear them. There was a lot of such talk and some seemed real and some were rumors. There were all different kinds of things. The so called youths, liked the new work and they thought that they would have to go on this path. Some people thought that if you could not go ahead, you would suffer a loss in the future. So there were all different people, and I cannot say for sure. People like us were thinking that when we were told to go to China, we would think that we would be very happy because we wouldn’t need to worry about food. We would be given food and we could just study. We just had these kind of thoughts and we were not kind of broad-minded [Tib. བསམ་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ]. We were just thinking about studying the Chinese language and the characters. Otherwise, it would be hard when I would have to work in the future. Therefore, I must learn a little bit of Chinese.   

**Q:**  I had never been to Tibet during the old society and I have written in my book about how the People Association, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་འདུ] People&#x27;s Association.">mimang tsondu</a>, started and so on. At that time, did you know about these things, like how some people started the mimang tsondu? This was probably after 1951.   

**A:**  Yes. This was probably in 1955.   

**Q:**  This must be in 1953-54.   

**A:**  It was in 1952 or something. It was said that there was a such a thing. I also heard about a saying that Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་བློ་ཆོས་མཛད] and those people built a golden throne and those things.  

**Q:**  The golden throne was built later on.   

**A:**  We just heard about it a lot, saying that they did those things.  

**Q:**  At that time, when you and your friends [would] go to drink <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> or sweet tea, what would you talk about to each other? Would you talk about how in the future there would be trouble and so on?  

**Q:** (Trindor:) Did they meddle in politics?   

**A:**  No, they did not meddle into politics very much. But we hear about how someone was making war and those things. Most of the news we heard was from the Muslims in the Lhasa Barkor. They were saying that they were listening to the radio. [laughter] Otherwise, we did not hear much news.   

**Q:**  You were one of the knowledgeable people, right? So in 1951 and 1952, regarding the 17-Point Agreement, did you know clearly what the agreement was?  

**A:**  Even now, I am not knowledgeable and at that time, I was young and did not know about those things. I was just thinking about going to China. I heard that the Agreement was signed and the war took place in Chamdo, that one Battalion Commander Bükhang [Tib. རུ་དཔོན་སྦུད་ཁང] and Ngabö did something, and that Wang Chime came and those things. Like nowadays, we wouldn’t talk about those things and wouldn't regard them as important things.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?  

**A:**  I was about 20 years old and didn’t pay much attention.   

**Q:**  There was no newspaper then, right?   

**A:** We only had the newspaper from India by Khunu Tharchin [Tib. ཁུ་ནུ་མཐར་ཕྱིན]. We had that in the early times and we would see it every time.   

**Q:**  Did the libraries collect these newspapers and can we get them nowadays?  

**A:**  They might have some of them.  

**Q:**  I just have a few of them. Not all of them.  

**A:**  In the past, they did. Most of the news we heard was from the Muslims on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. They would say when something happened.  

**Q:** You joined the Youth League and then you went to the Jitso labdra. Did other people insult you [for doing this] or say bad things about you?   

**A:** Yes, they did.   

**Q:** Did they tell you this in front of you?   

**A:** No, they didn’t. No matter whatever time, there were two different kinds of groups and two different kinds of ideologies, and you had to make your choice. For example, the kids who went to the school also had the same thing. They said that they were greedy and went to the school for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>, and that the so called Youth were kind of mediocre [Tib. ད་ག་སེ]. And among their relatives, they also said that someone joined the Chinese and took their salary.   

**Q:** How many years did you stay in China?   

**A:** I came back to Lhasa many times. Altogether I stayed in China for about 36 years. In 1955, a group of students came from China to the Middle School in Lhasa. They were the Chinese students to whom I taught Tibetan. At that time, the reforms were yet to be implemented, so there was no place to go in the countryside for practicing the Tibetan that they had been taught [Tib. དངོས་སྦྱོང]. A group of our Chinese students spoke fluent Tibetan so well that you could have really mistaken them for Tibetans. Once when they held a seminar in America, one of our students called Hutan gave a talk in Tibetan. So they asked him how did he learn such [fluent] Tibetan? He was one of the students who we taught and brought up. Some of them are still here and some of them became teachers in the Lhasa Middle School. One of them called Fan Zong Chen was also my student. They came to Lhasa for the practical study. After the democratic reforms, I brought my students to Tibet in the countryside and left one student in each household. The subjects, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, did not speak a single Chinese word, so their Tibetan improved. Later we also sent them to some meetings and let them give talks. Like this, their Tibetan became good. Before the democratic reforms, the students were divided between the Middle School and Primary School (the Seshin Labdra [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ]), and there was one called the Public Security School (Tib. ཇིདེ་ལབདྲ [Tib. སྤྱི་བདེ་སློབ་གྲྭ]), that was located near the Tsarong House. They were made to teach the classes while I was teaching math and those subjects in Tibetan. They said that they were very short of teachers in the Middle School, and they told me to stay for a year, but I stayed for some additional time. Just before the revolt, I went back to China thinking that the situation was not that good. [laughter] It became like this [it seems he was showing his thumbs up to express good] because I returned. Otherwise, if I had stayed with my uncle, I would have been in trouble.   

**Q:** In the beginning, when you went to China, how many students were there?   

**A:** Do you mean the Youth?   

**Q:**  No, the Youth was for the tour, right?  

**A:**  Yes, we were on tour, not as students.  

**Q:** How many people were there with you at that time?   

**A:** Approximately, there were about 30 people. The leaders [Ch. tuan zhang] were like Surkhang Khenjung [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་མཁན་ཆུང] the fat guy, Shölkang Jedrung La [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང], and Kapshö Thöndrup [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་དོན་གྲུབ], who committed suicide during the Cultural Revolution. His English was very good. And there were youth from Chamdo and Shigatse [Tib. གཞིས་ཀ་རྩེ] who had their own leaders. The main leaders were the ones from Lhasa. We went on tour everywhere in China. After the tour, I stayed there in China.   

**Q:** Where did you go for the tour?   

**A:** We went to Inner Mongolia, Shanghai, Dongbei and everywhere.   

**Q:** Did it take several months for the tour?   

**A:** Probably about a month. After that, they told us that we could stay if we wanted to.   

**Q:**  At that time, what kind of propaganda were they doing?  

**A:** The purpose of going to China for the tour was, after returning, to say among the youths that it was not like the rumors spread by other people, and that everything in China was very good. This was the main purpose and personally, it was for improving our standard of knowledge and becoming more far-sighted. I stayed there after the tour was over and in the beginning, I became a student in China.   

**Q:** What kind of student?   

**A:** In the beginning, I was a student at the Nationality University [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] and not a teacher. Ngawang Thöndrup and those people were teachers then.   

**Q:** What kind of a teacher was he?   

**A:** We were the same, teaching the Tibetan language to the Chinese. They might have introduced us saying that I am a pure Lhasan. They needed a teacher who was a native Lhasan who spoke clear Tibetan. They didn’t have any other conditions. So Ngawang Thöndrup and those people told them that he [Thuwang] was quite good and also diligent. Then they requested me to be a teacher, but I refused because I wanted to learn Chinese characters well and to graduate from the university. Later, I didn’t have any choice but to accept it because they bothered me a lot. So I accepted to teach for one year and then I didn’t have any choice but to teach continuously. That’s how I became a teacher. I only got the chance to study in the school for 6 months.   

**Q:** How did you learn Chinese spoken language?   

**A:** Because my students were all Chinese, I also learned Chinese at the same time, and practiced Chinese and I could improve my Chinese. I could learn spoken Chinese faster than the ones who studied Chinese in the school, though they could learn more Chinese characters. They also taught me the Chinese characters. In 1955, I went to research languages and I learned linguistics [Ch. yu yan xue] for a half year. I learned spoken Chinese like this and I have never been in the class to learn Chinese characters. I just studied during my spare times and practiced it.   

**Q:** This was in 1952, right?   

**A:**  This was in 1953.  

**Q:** How about 1954?   

**A:** I stayed in China.   

**Q:** When did you return?   

**A:**  I came back once in 1955 for a short time and then I went back. I had to come to Tibet frequently because after that, a group of students went to Tibet in 1963 and I came to Tibet leading those students. At that time, it was after the democratic reform and I stayed in Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]. I left one student in each households. We had a hard time because I had to go everywhere to check on the students. In order to write the sounds of spoken Tibetan, they could not write them in Tibetan, so we made a kind of pronunciation called pinyin [Tib. པིན་ཡིན] which we used in the Tibetan language book. They could write this in pinyin and write the meaning in Chinese under it, and when I went to check them, I would transcribe them into Tibetan. In this pinyin we also had the tones. For example, they would write words like cow [Tib. བ་ཕྱུག] and flat cow dung [Tib. ལྕི་བ་ཏེ་པོ]. In each month, we would gather the students in the district and give them an exam. They would have to learn by heart a fixed amount of words in a month, like 300-400 words.   

**Q:** Did they learn them by heart?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Could the students in the present time, do this?   

**A:**  They could not. The Chinese students were very diligent and in the countryside they only had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and those things to eat. Once every two weeks the students would get together in the district and they would eat better food. And then they loaded their bedding on donkeys and went to the countryside. Nowadays, if you tell the Chinese students to go like this, they would never go  

**Q:** You went to China in 1951-52 and came back in 1955. So at that time, what kind of differences did you notice in the way of Lhasa people making their living and those things?   

**A:**  Do you mean in my mind?  

**Q:**  Yes. What kind of feelings did you have when you came back all of a sudden after staying three years?  

**A:**  Do you mean when I came in 1963?  

**Q:**  No, in 1955.  

**A:** Do you mean the difference between China and Tibet?   

**Q:**  (Trindor:) Later, when you came back with the students?  

**A:**  At that time, it was a chaotic situation. To tell you the truth, when I think about that, people like me probably had a strong feeling of following the revolution path. I became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> for a short time, but I was wearing Chinese suits and stayed in places like Metrogongar and Chushul researching the language. So people were talking a lot about this because the local government there was intact. They were calling the Chinese, “The Chinese Corpse” (Tib. གྱརོ [Tib. རྒྱ་རོ]), and some people even told me “If you don’t be careful, they might kill you.” As for myself, I was thinking that I had already started to go on this path, so there was no need to think about different things. And to tell you the truth, I didn’t have the thought of being two-faced. I accomplished my duty of researching the language and brought the students. Politically, I had one thought. Among my relatives, there was one called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> Jola [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང་ཇོ་ལགས] who was the husband of my paternal aunt. He had a house in front of Jarpa Khangsar [Tib. སྦྱར་པ་ཁང་གསར]. I told him to sell his house and become a schoolteacher. Do not stay like this and I also found a house buyer. But because of a little difference on the price, he didn’t sell it. Later he died in the revolt and the house was confiscated. He was not the lay official Namseling. At that time, I definitely knew that after a short time, there would be a change in Tibet because I had stayed in China for such a long time and saw the entire situation and knew about the Chinese revolution. (Tashi Tsering came in and he said please sit down.) He was a dancer, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གར་ཕྲུག་པ] The ceremonial dance troupe of the Dalai and Panchen Lamas. Young boys were conscripted via a corvée levy from serf/miser peasant families who were compensated for the loss of their son by a reduction in their other taxes. Such boys left their families and moved either to Lhasa or Shigatse.">gadrukpa</a>, and I know all about his history and he knows about my history. [laughter] Because Tibet is a small place, we know all about the people.   

**Q:** I also collected a little bit about him.   

**A:** Therefore, I was thinking that I should do something beforehand which would be beneficial. Otherwise, it would not be good. However, I didn’t know that the revolt would take place. According to the initial plan, it was decided to do the peaceful democratic reform in 1956. (Trindor:) And dividing the lands. Then the people told them to delay it and it was delayed for 6 years from 1956 and the revolt took place in 1959. We were doing language research and there was also a group doing social research who came from China. Their duty was to do research on rich families they knew and how many family members there were and how much land they had. This was a little bit in preparation for the 1956 reform. They were saying that, "The people will not remain like the present situation. Therefore, you have to do something. Otherwise, it will be difficult in the future." I was telling this to the people who were close to me. As for the people who were not close, we would educate them and they would also educate us.   

**Q:** From the government's side, what were they thinking? It seems to me that among the Tibetans, there were three different ways of thinking.   

**A:** Inside the local government, there were many different people in their ways of thinking. One group of people had similar thoughts to us.   

**Q:** Who were the people who thought that the situation would change?   

**A:** How can I say that? I am just saying in general. The majority were the ones who are now in the Political Consultative Conference, like Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད]. [laughter] This is very clear. And there were also those who joined the revolt, but later they treated them kindly according to the policy because of their position, and put them in the Political Consultative Conference like Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ]. Some of them were not in the revolt from the beginning and followed the Communist Party whole heartedly. The Political Consultative Conference was for doing the United Front [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར], which was translated correctly and means that sometimes, we have to fight with them and sometimes we have to treat them kindly. If they didn’t treat them like this, this would influence many similar people. A group of people were saying that they would destroy the dharma and Buddhism. And a group of people were saying that they would take away my estate. Another group of people were saying that I didn’t have an estate and those things, and that whoever treats me kindly are my parents [Tib. སུ་བྱམས་ཕ་མ་དང་གང་སྐྱིད་ཕ་ཡུལ] and wherever I'm happy is my homeland. There were three different kind of people.   

**Q:** This was in 1955, right?   

**A:**  Yes.  

**Q:** At that time, the Dalai Lama was in China, right?   

**A:** He went to China in 1954 and in 1955, he went to India for the Buddha Jayanti. They were saying that Ngabö had three great accomplishments. This was one of them, where he brought the Dalai Lama back from India. The second one is when he brought the Dalai Lama back from Yadong. And the first one was the signing 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:** Yes. In India, they had a big problem.   

**A:** And he could bring the Dalai Lama from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> where they had established the Traveling Government [Tib. བྱེས་གཞུང] called the Palace of Happiness for the Cyclic Existence and Nirvana [Tib. སྲིད་ཞིའི་དགེ་ལེགས་ཕོ་བྲང].   

**Q:** Then you returned to China, right?   

**A:** Yes, and then I became a teacher all the time.   

**Q:** You mean until 1963, right?   

**A:** Until 1988. In that year I came back. Until then I was doing my teacher's job. From my point of view, my greatest accomplishment was that I liked the Tibetan culture because I learned culture for many years. I could teach and nurture many students. The reason why I worked so hard in China was because what I taught was Tibetan culture and the students were Tibetan. If your nationality does not have your culture, one’s own will become very poor. In order to not lose it and to develop it, this was my thought or ideal. There should be someone who can be the motivating power [Ch. tong li] for doing this and I also have a great responsibility. When someone who learned and understood many situations of the world and China, [was their teacher] their enthusiasm would become stronger, thinking that this is very important. Therefore, after I came back in 1988, I have established a school in Lhasa and I am still teaching lessons. And nowadays, I am teaching the babysitters of the cadres. Foreigners would feel that this is a very strange thing. Many teachers from America would come to our place and say that those young people didn’t have the chance to study, this is very hard for them. According to the world custom, this is regarded as a criminal act [Ch. fan zui xing wei]. However, given the situation in Tibet, they didn’t have [any] choice but to do this. Therefore, I collected the babysitters and taught them writing and reading.   

**Q:**  That is great.  

**A:** In the past, I taught them for two years during my spare time in the evenings and didn’t charge a single penny. The purpose was in order to improve the quality of the nationality, first they needed culture. There are many people among the cadres who do not understand Tibetan culture and think that the Tibetan culture is poor and that it was merely to read scriptures in the monastery and nothing else. As for the Tibetan history, from the time of King Nyatri Tsenpo [Tib. གཉའ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ], the Tibetan history started, and the three Drung Diu Bon [Tib. སྒྲུང་རྡེའུ་བོན] [drung means telling stores and diu for telling them?] and the Bon religion governed the country. At that time, Tibet had its own scripts and scripts on other things. Actually we had something so we would not need to admire others. However, some Tibetans do not understand that one’s own culture is important. Actually, if you want to improve the nationalism, you must develop the language. In foreign countries they have had the same situation. In the past, when the [Tibetan] delegation came from India, we talked to each other. We didn’t talk about politics to each other because each of us had a path and an idea to follow. But when we talked about the culture, they also said our young people could not speak pure Tibetan. Some mix English with Tibetan and some mix Hindi with Tibetan. So there was danger that real Tibetan language would vanish. Here we also have the same problem. For example, even my own children do not know pure Tibetan. [laughter] Since I am a person doing research on language, I think we must not ignore language because it is the main symbol of nationality. Even now, my main ideal is to teach letters until my death.   

**Q:**  You are right. We also had a talk about this.   

