# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0310.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Gen Thuwang [Tib. རྒན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Trindor  
**Name:**  Gen Thuwang [Tib. རྒན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 58  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1933  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gen Thuwang [Tib. རྒན་ཐུབ་དབང] was a student at the Tse Labdra who later became a tsidrung. In this interview, he describes the unusual way he became a Tse Labdra student, as well as how individuals typically became students there. He also describes the two types of students who attended the school, as well as the students' daily routines, and what they did and did not learn, and the beatings they endured.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0310_01/H_0310_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How did you become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>? You were not a monk, right?   

**A:** Do you mean how did I become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra student?   

**Q:**  Yes. Please tell us the procedure for this.   

**A:**  In the beginning, the so called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra consisted of monks conscripted from monasteries like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> (Sera, Drepung, Ganden) and the Mushi Jogsum, that is, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> and Jokpori [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི]. The term <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> referred to the custom of conscripting monks to become monk officials. In addition, there were also monks who came from village monasteries like Lhoka's Tse Tshogpa [Tib. རྩེ་ཚོགས་པ] and some other monasteries in Lhoka. There was a limit on the number of monks who would be recruited via trachag. The monasteries would pass down the responsibility for sending the trachag monks to their Khamtsen. Regarding how I came to the school, once when they did the trachag in Ganden Gungru Khamtsen [Tib. གུང་རུ་ཁམས་ཚན], most of the monks there came from Hor [nomads in the north] and they were poor. Among them, there was one Tse Labdra student who was staying in a room with big windows called Rabsal [Tib. རབ་གསལ] in the courtyard called Deyangshar [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས་ཤར] in the Potala. Once, after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] The &quot;Yogurt&quot; Festival held in Lhasa to celebrate the end of the monks&#x27; summer retreat in the middle of the 5th lunar month (usually August). It was a time when Tibetan operas were performed.">Shotön</a> Festival, there was a Tse Labdra who came back to the room and he was trying to hang his sogsha [Tib. སོག་ཞྭ] cap by climbing on boxes. The boxes collapsed and he fell down into the courtyard and died so they needed a replacement for him. My father was a clerk [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས] in the the Tseja [the supply office/treasury for the Dalai Lama in the Potala], so he would hear the news all the time. This [he knew that] even after three years they couldn't send a replacement, so the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> was asking them [the khamtsen] why they didn’t send the replacement and saying they must send one soon, but they didn’t have a person to send as the replacement because the person had to be qualified as smart and having no problem with his organs and limbs, although they would not check how he spoke. Consequently, my father asked them whether he could send his son as the replacement and they said, "Of course it will be okay, we thank you for that. Please send your son." So like this, I was sent there. That's how I became a Tse Labdra student.   

**Q:**  Before that, you were not a monk, right?  

**A:**  Right. So I had to go through a kind procedure. During the Mönlam Prayer Festival I joined their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, which was located in the house called Paljor Rabten [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་རབ་བརྟན]. This khamtsen was very poor and had only about 40-50 monks, and we served them tea and gave alms to the khamtsen monks [Tib. ཚོམ་ཇ]. I didn't wear a monk's robe, but wore the uniform of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra and was admitted in the khamtsen. That's how I became a part of them. It was not like I first became a monk in Ganden and then was called from there [to Tse Labdra].   

**Q:**  It was like going through the backdoor, right?   

**A:**  If you say it is a backdoor. But they didn’t have a person to send. If I talk about the history, some say that it [Tse Labdra] was established by the 5th Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  What year did you join the school?   

**A:**  It was in the 1940's.   

**Q:**  Was that before Reting's trouble and the Sera War?  

**A:**  At that time, I was a child about 14 years old. I had seen them bring Reting and put him in the prison. We were watching from the Potala. They sent Surkhang [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང] and Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] to get him and the Sera monks stopped them. They blew horns near the gate of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང] The military headquarters of the Tibetan Army.">magjigang</a> [Tibetan Army Headquarters]. The prison where Reting was shut in was located under the room where I lived. When we went back and forth at night, we had to recite the mantra of Manjushri [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱངས] and Arapatsa [Tib. ཨ་ར་པ་ཙ]. When we went to have our lunch, Rimpoche would look at us from the bars. (laughter) He would go to the Tsondu Gyendzom meeting for the interrogation, bending his body [at the waist], and two Tibetan soldiers would follow him. When the Sera War took place, I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra student. According to the history, it was established by the 5th Dalai Lama and it was said that it was burned in a fire and the 7th Dalai Lama made the charter [Tib. བཅའ་ཡིག] regarding the discipline and systems. Generally speaking, most of the students were conscripted as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> and there were not many rich people’s children who had a lot of money. If there were some, they were called private who were from the private households, and they would pay their expenses. They had to serve tea, rice, sweet potatoes and butter, dresi, on the day they got admitted into the school in Lhasa. Usually, people would not go to this school because it was very strict and they would beat the students very much.   

**Q:**  Who was the teacher? Was he a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་ཞབས] A Tibetan government official.">shungshab</a> [government official]?  

**A:**  There was one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་ཞབས] A Tibetan government official.">shungshab</a> appointed and one teacher would come from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> [Tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང].   

**Q:**  This was at Nyingma Monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Our school was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Rigne Labdra Chemmo [Tib. རྩེ་རིག་གནས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ]. Now, when I worked for the Communist Party and when I wrote my own life story, sometimes I wrote Tse Labdra Chemmo [Ch. bu da la xue xiao]. At that time, in Tibet, there were only two government run schools, [it and] the Mentsikhang [Medical and Astrological Institute]. There were also a few private schools. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> would be appointed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> to teach only handwriting. He would not meddle in other things. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> teacher would stay in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> in the Potala. Our teacher was called Lodrö Chösang [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་ཆོས་བཟང]. Now I know he was very well educated. He taught us the spelling system caalled Dagyig Ngagdrön [Tib. དག་ཡིག་ངག་སྒྲོན], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སུམ་རྟགས] Tibetan grammar.">sumtag</a> and Shetring. He was the one who taught us the basic knowledge. Before I went to the Tse Labdra, I went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] Name of a private school in Lhasa (and the house in which is was located).">Nyarongsha</a> [Tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] private school in Lhasa for several years. It was said the strict discipline was written in the charter. I, being the replacement [for the boy who died], I was alone when I came to the school, but the other previous ones, like Chömpel Dorje La [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལགས], had been there for three years. According to the religious saying, it was said there was a great godess [Tib. ལྷ་མོ] in that school. In the past, it was said that no matter [if] you have a high position like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, if you haven’t been a Tse Labdra, you are not allowed to enter the school. They were not afraid of the law, but they were afraid that the goddess might cause harm to them. [laughter] Even if you become a beggar, if you have been a Tse Labdra, you are allowed to go in there. There were indeed some people in the past who later lost their celibacy and became poor. I am not saying that I was poor, but in general, being a Tse Labdra was the main channel for poor monks to become government Kudrak. For example, the family where Thönwang Sonam Tobgye [Tib. don dbang bsod nams stobs rrgyas] went as a bridegroom was the family of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Tempa Jamyang [Tib. བཀའ་བློན་བླ་མ་བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས]. He was the grandfather of the bride. When Kalön Lama Tempa Jamyang was conscripted as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a>, it was said that he was very poor and was a son of an adrung. Later, he studied and got a higher position and later he got a very high position. At that time, our parents would also advise us saying, “You should study hard and later you will get a high position and become rich, and you can support your relatives." [laughter] This was the main purpose of advising and educating us.   

**Q:**  When you joined the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra, did you have to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>?  

**A:**  No, because we were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་པ] The name for the students in the Tse labdra school who were recruited by conscription from specified monasteries to be trained to become monk officials.">shungba</a>. There were two types of students, shungba and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a> (private students). When the gerpa joined the school, they would have to be a kind of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, but they did not call it chöndze.   

**Q:**  Do you mean in the monastery?   

**A:**  No. They didn’t need to do anything in the monastery. Many of those who came from the monastery were not chöndze. They came from the ordinary monks. It was not like that in the monastery. There were high ranking and low ranking {monk), and the low ranking ones were not allowed to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra. It was like working as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ] A tax.">tre</a> tax obligation, as long as you had a child to show to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> [to fulfill the tax obligation], it was okay. At that time, they did not regard it as a very important thing. Saying that we had to send our children to the Tse Labdra, like now, they went through the back door in the school.   

**Q:**  What I heard is that among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a>, most of them were not ordinary [poor] monks and there were also the children from the better-off households [Tib. མི་ཚང་དྲག་པ] like you.   

**A:**  We were not a better off-household. We were middle class [Tib. འབྲིང].   

**Q:**  So they come from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་དམངས] An ordinary or common monk.">tramang</a>, right?  

**A:**  Yes, they did come from the tramang. And [they came in cases] like where my father who knew that there was a vacancy and thought that in the future I would become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and would get a higher position. Otherwise they just send them from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> in the monastery. However, some better-off households would know about it and they would send their children thinking that they would become better. However, some better-off households would not dare to send their children because it the strictness of the school was famous. One student couldn’t bear the beatings and jumped out from the big windows on this side of the Potala. If you talk about the discipline, it was astonishing. For example, the students were not allowed to look at the student <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒན་བདག] A senior student placed in charge of other students.">genda</a> above his waist and not allowed to look at the teacher above his knees. When we went to urinate or something, we had to go bent over like this. For example, when we went to the toilet and passed one step from this, you got whipped 10 times or 15 times. It was said that there was such a charter [for the school], but I never saw that. When the school started in the early morning, we first had to recite some prayers. If a student came to the school at the first prayer, there was no [beating] and it was okay. If you were late and came there at the second prayer, which is Ganden Lhagya [Tib. dga’ ldan lh brgya], you got three canes on your cheek. The last prayer was called something like Tsenphel Thöndrup [Tib. ཚེ་འཕེལ་དོན་གྲུབ], and you would get 20 lashes on your bottom and you were not allowed to yell. But in that school they didn’t have the rule to lash on the bottom, they would lash on this leg. This was because the students were not allowed to wear trousers and they would wear skirts under their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> so when they got lashed, they would take this off and roll the chupa up like this and they would lash [you] on the leg. The tip of the lash would hit the boot. If you do it like this, then the tip of the lash will hit here and you will be sore at once. When they got lashed, they would cover their mouths like this and pretended to be very bold.   

**Q:**  I will say it in English. Do you mean they lashed on the upper part of the leg, between the knees and waist on the bottom side, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When we were there, after the prayers, we would have breakfast, and the students whose turn it was to do the sweeping [Tib. གད་རེས] would hold the kettle like this and would not come in. Then the students went in line and received the cane on their cheek. Ngawang Thöndrup [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ] was the student prefect and he was very strict. He would hit me on the cheek with the cane. He was smart, but a little bit mean [Tib. སེམས་པ་བརྣག་པོ].   

**Q:**  Yes, he was a person like that. (Trindor:) Even now, he is there.   

**A:**  When they'd hit you with the cane on your cheek, you'd have to hold your breath by closing your mouth. Otherwise, you would get sore when they hit your cheek with the cane. When I went to the school, I had sores on my cheek and when I drank tea, it would come out. That’s how the student’s handwriting would become very good. They would not teach much of the scriptures [Tib. དཔེ་ཆ] and those things, but the Mentsigang teacher taught scriptures very nicely. Here, scriptures mean culture [Tib. rig hnas], like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ངག་སྒྲོན] A basic spelling book, a book that lists correct spellings.">ngagdrön</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སུམ་རྟགས] Tibetan grammar.">sumtag</a>, etc. I had been to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] Name of a private school in Lhasa (and the house in which is was located).">Nyarongsha</a> School, but they never taught sumtag and those things. However, now, when I think about it, the Nyarongsha School was established in a very strange way. It was for directly serving the local government. In the beginning, they taught the alphabet, ka and kha etcetera. And there was a student called kashib [Tib. ཀ་ཞིབ] who checked the alphabet. Next was the tshugshib [Tib. ཚུགས་ཞིབ] who checked the second bigger letters. Then there was one called the assistant student prefect or genyog [Tib. རྒན་གཡོག], and then there was the student prefect. These were in line. For example, if I have to promote you up, I have to write a report [Tib. སྙན་ཞུ] saying “I am submitting this report because this student is good in his studies, so I would like to ask whether this student can be appointed as the genyog or not. And the teacher would put his mark on the letter [Tib. འཐུས] which meant okay. Like this they taught all of the rules and systems of the local government and when they graduated, the students knew how to write reports and how to interrogate etcetera. In Nyarongsha, they also had a kind of line of positions or classes. There was one part called Gope Khugkyog [Tib. སྒོ་པའི་ཁུག་ཀྱོག] where they let the servants stay. We were like the middle class called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a>, and the children of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> would sit inside and the daughters of the kudrak would be seated upstairs near the teacher.   

**Q:**  My wife Chunden La [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས] also went to Nyarongsha.  

**A:**  Probably she also went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] A new school jointly started by the Chinese and the Tibetan Government in 1952 that was open to students from all classes in society. Thus the name.">Society School</a>. I told you I went to the Society School in 1952. Her Tibetan is good.   

**Q:**  They would not teach history and that stuff, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They never taught that. After the liberation and especially nowadays, many kinds of knowledge that used to be taught inside have moved outside. For example, in the past, they never taught logic [Tib. ཚད་མ] in the schools. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] A new school jointly started by the Chinese and the Tibetan Government in 1952 that was open to students from all classes in society. Thus the name.">Society School</a> and the Cadre’s Training School [Ch. zang gan xiao], they taught logic, history and about religious sects [Tib. གྲུབ་མཐའ]. In Beijing Schools, they also taught logic, history and religious sects. This was because now all of these were regarded as knowledge. In the past they did not teach history in the monasteries and also in the schools. For example, the history book called Miwang Togjö [Tib. མི་དབང་རྟོགས་བརྗོད] was said to be banned [Tib. ཐེམ་སྤངས་པ], which means it was not allowed to be taken outside of the threshold. And the local government would seal it and keep it somewhere.   

**Q:**  Why did they do that?   

**A:**  Actually, in Miwang Togjö, there are probably many things regarding Sino-Tibetan relations. I don’t know why and I don’t know in detail what is in there. However, now, when we look at it with a new perspective, people like us know the old and also the new. So I am just wondering what was in it. But they would not teach history in the school. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> teacher would teach us handwriting and would not come every day. Most of the time, those others like the student prefect would take charge. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> teacher would stay there all the time. First, he would teach us ngagdön (spelling book). Then the sumjupa and tagjug [Tib. rtags’ jug) grammars and then they would teach shetring [Tib. བཤེས་སྤྲིང].   

**Q:**  What is shetring?  

**A:** This was a letter sent by Nagarjuna [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ] to the Indian King Dejö Sangpo [Tib. རྒྱལ་པོ་བདེ་སྤྱོད་བཟང་པོ]. Nagarjuna was a great Indian pandit. In this letter, it was written a little bit about practicing dharma and engaging in worldly affairs [Tib. ཆོས་བྱེད་སྟངས་དང་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་བྱེད་སྟངས].   

**Q:**  How many years did you stay in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra?  

**A:**  Six years. There was no fixed limit of years and regarding this, there was really a back door relationship. After getting enrolled in the school, if you had quite a good knowledge and had strong people who would support you [Tib. མགོ་འདྲེན་ཟབ་པོ], you would become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> soon. There were people who stayed 4 years in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra. But some who were poor and didn’t have a backdoor relation would have to stay there for a very long time, even until they became old.  

**Q:** What age do you mean old here?   

**A:** I mean comparatively old as a student. I don’t mean, they had to stay there until [they were] in their sixties and seventies. [laughter] As a student, when they become in their thirties and forties, then they were no longer students. Therefore, the Lhasa people called them an old student as a nickname. These people didn’t have the means to bribe them.   

**Q:**  Whom would they have to bribe?  

**A:** The drunyichemmo. All of the affairs regarding the monks were controlled by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> and all of the affairs regarding the secular were controlled by the Kashag and the Tsikhang. These categories were divided very clearly. So the combination of monasteries and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra was done correctly because this belonged to the Yigtsang. The regular big exam was also given by the Yigtsang, and we had to go to the Yigtsang [for it]. The Yigtsang would give a big exam. And there was one exam called the Yarjel yigtse [Tib. དབྱར་མཇལ་ཡིག་ཚད]. The results of this exam would have to be submitted to the Dalai Lama. The exam sheet was a large one on which we had to draw the gilded roofs and all the 12 types of scripts like Horyig, Mongolian script, Lantsa, a kind of Indian script, and Wadru, a kind of Muslim script. There were also many new scripts like Namdrol Yigsar [Tib. རྣམ་གྲོལ་ཡིག་གསར], Jarog Yigsar [Tib. ? yig gsar] and Tenzin Yigsar [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་ཡིག་གསར]. We had to practice these for one month. This was just to be able to write them. They didn’t teach the meanings. These were taught by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> teacher. We would write these scripts on the two sides and in the middle we wrote the Tibetan exam scripts. Each exam sheet had different meanings which would be given by the Mindröling teacher. These were not composed by himself. He probably took them from some scriptures. After this Yarjel, they would give the ones who came as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> like us, a roll of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣམ་བུ] Hand-woven woolen fabric/material.">nambu</a> which was a very rough weave. They would not give this to the private students. When I was in the school, there was only one private student.   

**Q:**  The private students were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, right?  

**A:**  Some of them were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and some of them were from a little bit better off households. Actually, the students were poor. I stayed there for 6 years.  

**Q:** How about the foods and such things?  

**A:** We had to eat our own food. There was nothing from the school.   

**Q:**  Did you have to make your own tea?  

**A:** Yes. And we only had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> dough, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤགས] A staple Tibetan dish of tsampa mixed with tea and kneaded into balls of dough-like consistency.">pag</a> and tea. No dishes [Tib. ཁ་ལག] like nowadays. If your home was so-so, they would bring some dishes to eat with pag.   

**Q:**  How would the private students apply? Did they apply to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra?  

**A:**  They had to apply to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Office saying that they want to send a child to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra. The Tse Labdra and the one called Yigtsang Lobtrug [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་སློབ་ཕྲུག] are different, but these are always mistaken by many people. The Yigtsang also had students who looked like Tse Labdra students and they wore the cap called sogsha [Tib. སོག་ཞྭ]. They were absolutely the same as the staff [Tib. ལས་བྱ] of the Yigtsang who had the rank of tsidrung. They only had about four such students. The Tsitrugpa were the trainees for the lay officials. Tsitrugpa means the students of Tsikhang and Yigtsang Lobtrug means the small students of Yigtsang. You are not allowed to become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་འཁོར] Lay (aristocratic) officials in the traditional Tibetan government (in contrast to the monk officials).">drungkor</a> without being a Tsitrug.   

**Q:**  Would the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra have to learn the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡེའུ] The traditional method of Tibetan arithmetic that uses a board and a variety of items like beans, sticks and stones.">diu</a> system of calculation?   

**A:**  They would not. Actually, according to the original system, we were supposed to learn the five major sciences: grammar, Sanskrit, medicine, logic/philosophy and painting/handicrafts. And the five minor sciences: poetry, semantics, lexicography, astrology, and dance/drama. But they taught a little bit [of] astrology. So we had to learn by heart the scripture called Ngagpa Tratsi [Tib. སྔགས་པ་ཁྲ་རྩིས྄], which was for checking the [apprpriateness of] the days of the week. For example, it says “Friday is good for all work/affairs” [Tib. པ་སངས་བྱ་བ་ཀུན་ལ་བཟང]. And it said that you should not engage in trade on Saturdays, etcetera. [recites a part too fast so it wasn't translated] They also taught the divine astrology for checking about making choices, that is whether it is good or bad to do things. I didn’t learn the whole thing but just learned by heart the scripture called Ngagpa Tratsi. When I finished this, I met that teacher [unclear]. After I went to China, my teacher [from <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a>] probably lived for some years. In 1984, I came from China and went to Mindröling and I asked people about my teacher. They said that he lived a long life. There was a very old man who had studied together with my teacher and he told me about my teacher. I told him, "I was a student of Teacher Lodrö Chösang La [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་ཆོས་བཟང་ལགས] and now I am working in China." Later, my teacher probably didn’t join the revolt and became a Committee Member of the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཨུ་ཡོན] in Lhoka. I heard my second teacher, who was very young, joined the revolt and became very poor, and later on he became a gatekeeper somewhere. He was very knowledgeable, but he was spoiled like many other knowledgeable people [were] ruineds during the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  What time did the school start?  

**A:**  We would get up very early at around 3 a.m. If you didn’t go fast, you would have to stay there [get beaten], and nobody wanted to stay there.  

**Q:**  It was dark at this time, right?  

**A:**  Yes, but you had to go. And there was no way to say that there was no electric lights. Nowadays, because we have lights, we have the terms there is light and there is no light, but at that time we never thought about this.  

**Q:**  What would you have to do after you came to the school?  

**A:** We would recite the prayers called kyorta [Tib. སྐྱོར་རྟ]. Regarding the tones of this school prayer, there were a lot of things to say from the religious point of view. Wherever you go at other monasteries, they don’t have that kind of tone. It was an extremely pleasant tone. They had the whole set of prayers, and if you got to the school at the time of the first prayers, it was okay. But if you got there at the later prayers, then you would get lashed. However, it was not certain that they would lash them every morning. They would lash [them] once every week or once every two weeks. When there was a lashing, they would hold the kettle like this. And when there was no lashing, they would tell him to go and he would turn out carrying the empty kettle. In the past, they used to have tea, but later there was no tea.   

**Q:**  How long would the morning prayers take?  

**A:** It took a little more than an hour. After that, we would go to our room to eat some pasty <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> [Tib. ཇ་ལྡུར]. We were like monks. Then we washed our faces and then practiced handwriting for the whole day.   

**Q:**  Do you have a break at the midday?  

**A:**  No.   

**Q:** (Trindor:) Wouldn’t the school serve you lunch?   

**A:** Shit! It was absolutely out of question [Tib. སྐྱག་པོ་འདྲ་པོ་ཅིག]. We would go to our room to eat. Our rooms were located at the end of the Deyangshar. For some people like me, our home asked the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> teacher to take care of us and our home would bring <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and such stuff to the teacher and the teacher would feed us. Some people would pay monthly some amount of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དངུལ་སྲང] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system, 50 of which equaled 1 dotse.">ngüsang</a> to the teacher for the food and the teacher would give them whatever he would eat. Some would ask the Dalai Lama’s dialectics debate partner, tsenshab, or the Lord Chamberlain Drönyerchemmo, who lived there, to keep the students. Their condition was better because they gave them whatever they would eat. And there were also two or three students sharing a room. In the past, my home asked the Mindröling teacher to keep me and later they asked Söthab Shipala [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་ཞིབ་པ་ལགས], who had the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and did the grinding of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> for the Dalai Lama, to keep me. He had a storeroom downstairs which used to be the place where Reting Rimpoche was shut in. And there was also a laymen called Aku Shipa [Tib. ཨ་ཁུ་ཞིབ་པ], who would grind the tsamba for the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  In the morning, you also had to practice handwriting, right?  

**A:**  Yes.  

**Q:** And then you went to eat food, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in the evening they taught the scriptures. The teacher would be seated on a throne and we would sit on the floor cross-legged without cushions. I think, the Tibetan scholars in the past were real scholars because they learned by heart all of the knowledge, which had become like their own blood and flesh. Nowadays, in China, when the so called professors come to teach, they bring a bunch of books and they look at them between the time of teachings. I swear by the Buddha statue in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ] that in the past, in Tibet, when they taught, I had never seen someone carrying a book in his hands when teaching. My teacher would carry a snuffbox and a handkerchief. We would have to learn by heart the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ངག་སྒྲོན] A basic spelling book, a book that lists correct spellings.">ngagdrön</a> [He recites the first part of it very fast]. [We studied it by reciting it, for example] All the students would say kunkhyen [Tib. ཀུན་མཁྱེན] and the teacher would say kunkhyen which meant "all knowing" [Tib. ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ནི་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ]. And we would say Shakya and the teacher would say Shakya which meant either Shakya thupa the Buddha or a name of a lineage [Tib. ཤ་ཀྱ་ཐུབ་པ་འམ་ཤ་ཀྱའི་རིགས་ཤིག]. Or Karmapa which is the name of the Reincarnation or person’s name [Tib. ཀར་མ་པ་ནི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་ཀར་མ་པ་འམ་མིའི་མིང]. [recites some part of it very fast] Unlike nowadays, we would not make notes. We just learned it by heart; all the text and also the definitions. If we forget some parts, we would ask each other. At that time, I could remember these amazingly.   

**Q:** At that time, did you take the (monk's) vows?   

**A:**  No, I didn’t. I didn’t take the vows and then return it. We were just a kind of [Tib. གྲས] of monk [without vows].  

**Q:**  If you become a monk, you would have had to study something and take the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཚུལ] 1. The novice vows that Buddhist monks and nuns take. 2. A monk who has taken such vows.">getsül</a> vow, right?   

**A:** Yes. We were just regarded as a kind of monk with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རབ་བྱུང] Monastic vows.">rabjung</a>, because all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra students came from among the monks. However, in our mind, we would not think that we had taken vows. But in Tse Labdra, we had the thing called lost celibacy. This means we had the rabjung vow. If a Tse Labdra student slept with a woman and lost his celibacy, they would kick him out of the school and he became a layman. However, we didn’t have the things like you ask for the monk’s vow and the lama gives you the vow. We didn’t have a lama in the Tse Labdra. There were only two teachers. We were supposed to already be monks from the beginning when we come into the school.   

**Q:** If you don’t take the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རབ་བྱུང] Monastic vows.">rabjung</a> vow from the lama, then it means you didn’t really have the vow, right?   

**A:** Yes. According to the real system of the dharma, when you become a monk, they cut the tuft of the hair [Tib. སྐྲ་ཕུད་ཕུལ]. This means you took the vow. But I didn’t have a chance to do that. And you were not allowed to say that I didn’t get the chance and we were just regarded as a kind of monk.   

**Q:**  Actually, you were regarded as one's who didn’t have the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རབ་བྱུང] Monastic vows.">rabjung</a> vow, right?  

**A:** We were regarded as if we had the vow.   

**Q:** [Trindor:] Though you didn’t take the vow, but you were regarded as you kind of took it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And when we entered the school, nobody asked us whether we had taken the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རབ་བྱུང] Monastic vows.">rabjung</a> vow or not.  

**Q:** You stayed for six years in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra, right?   

**A:**  Yes.  

**Q:**  During this six years, did you have any connections with Ganden monastery? Like sometimes, did you go to the prayer assembly meeting of monks?  

**A:**  Not at all. During the Mönlam, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> from Ganden would come to Lhasa and sometimes my home would serve tea [Tib. ཚོམ་ཇ], porridge and give alms to the khamtsen and the khamtsen would also say [I] belonged to them and at that time, I didn’t need to stay there.  

**Q:**  (Trindor:) Would they give you some share of the alms received in the monastery?   

**A:** They didn’t. Some of the other big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> would do that, but my khamtsen in Ganden which was called Gungru Khamtsen, was said to be the poorest and they didn’t have that custom. If I tell you how I spent the six years, one was to practice handwriting. And later on when my handwriting became so-so, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> would give me many things to copy like edicts, reports, and other things like long letters of teh government that needed to be written. They would let the students whose handwriting was better copy these things. Most of the writing had to be written in tsugtung. They did not teach cursive or the kind of script called Drutsa [Tib. འབྲུ་རྩ], which is a different type of tsugtung.   

**Q:**  What happened after six years?  

**A:**  After six years, I should have been a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, but at the time, when I was about to ask for permission to be a tsidrung, the Dalai Lama had already left for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> in 1950.   

**Q:**  He was not in Lhasa, right?  

**A:**  Yes. At the time, when I was about to reach my turn to become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, it was the time of the [two] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས].  

**Q:** After six years, your family would have had to do something for you to become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, right?   

**A:** Yes. After six years, they would have had to submit a report to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> along with a kind of exam sheet and a type of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> called nangdzö. And for this, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> would have to go to do the mibab jenshu. If we didn’t get it at that time, then we had to come back [and try again].   

**Q:** Would they do that right away?   

**A:** They would do that in couple of days.   

**Q:**  What would you have to do when you went for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ] The ceremony at which candidates for a position present themselves before officials (or the Dalai Lama/Regent) so that the higher officials can see firsthand what the candidate looks like. A visual inspection of candidates.">mibab jenshu</a>?  

**A:**  When we were at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra, we would wear our Tse Labdra uniform. And we would stay like this.  

**Q:**  Did you have to carry your handwriting [sample]?  

**A:**  That was submitted earlier along with the report. Mostly, they would not look at the appearance and the handwriting, they would look at the amount of the bribe. [laughter] If somebody bribed a lot, they would get it and some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra had to go through this stage many times because they didn’t have the means to give a bribe. There were many people who got rebuffed again and again. And some would get it at once.   

**Q:**  So from being a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Labdra, you became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, right?  

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:** How did you get the position?   

**A:**  By that time, I was the only one left among the group of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> that had been conscripted. And then they conscripted a new trachag below us. Then I became the student prefect and I was the only old student. So I got the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> position during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>'s time. By that time, we were not that interested in becoming a tsidrung and soon after that I had the thought of joining the revolution and going to China. And then I went to the Jitso Labdra that was located in Trungji linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག]. We went there by ourselves [their own wishes]. In the very beginning, there were only three of us.   

**Q:** Wow! Was that in 1951?   

**A:**  It was in 1952. In 1951, the Peaceful Liberation took place. While going to the Jitso Labdra in 1953, I went to China. At that time, there was a very good Chinese teacher called Han Jinjin who taught us Chinese. He is still alive. His Tibetan was also good. There were several of us. I don’t remember well, but we were taught in tents. When I was about to go to China, there were five of us. Later, I heard that this school became very big. We were the ones who started it. We were also thinking according to developing the society and constructing Tibet in the future, and we knew a little bit [about] what kind of path we would have to follow. Like this, I went to China.  

**Q:** After you became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> tell you go to the Jitso Labdra, or did you go voluntarily?   

**A:** How would they tell us to go to the school? They would not tell us to go to the school. It was very difficult to go the school because the ones who went to the Chinese school were regarded as very bad. We were called "togle labdrawa" (greedy students) [Tib. ལྟོགས་སླའི་སློབ་གྲྭ་བ], and the monks and soldiers would throw stones at us. It was very hard. So how could the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> send us? They would never do that. I went to China by myself stealthily. I first joined the Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ] and when I reached Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] I wrote a letter to my home. Actually, I didn’t have a home because my parents died when I was small and a relative raised me. Therefore, my thought of going to the school was a little bit related to my financial condition. If I had a home with a very good financial condition and one that took great care of me, maybe I would not have gone to China. Although I was kind of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, I didn’t have my parents, and a person who was said to be my maternal uncle took care of me and I stayed like his gidru. He would not treat me very nicely. He just treated me averagely. That’s why I had a strong feelings for join the revolution. I didn’t have the thought that it [Tibetan government] would last for a long time and I would get promoted to a high position. So then I went to China. First, I joined the Tibetan Cultural Patriotic Youth League [Tib. བོད་རྒྱལ་གཅེས་གཞོན་ནུ་ཤེས་རིག་མཐུན་གྲོགས་ཚོགས་པ] when they sent a tour group.   

**Q:** When did they start this?  

**A:**  It was established by the Communist Party in 1951, just after Tibet was liberated.   

**Q:** (Trindor:) They also gave a badge [Tib. རྟགས་མ] right?   

**A:** Yes. From among those in the Youth League, we were sent to China for the tour. The first person who went to China from Tibet was Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར]. He headed the Tibetan Tributary Mission [Tib. རྟེན་འབུལ་ཚོགས་པ]. We were the second batch. When we arrived in Chamdo, they were coming back [from China]. Ngawang Thöndrup [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ] and those people went to China in 1951. There were some people who spontaneously agreed [Tib. ཁ་རུབ] to go and went first and then we went with the Youth League Tour Group [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ]. After the tour, we were told that, "If you want to return, you can return. But you are young, so if you want to stay continuously and study, you can do that too." I was about 20 years old. Some of us stayed there and the majority returned. Our group leader [Ch. tuan zhang] was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> Thubden Nyima [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉི་མ].   

