# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.16 : Tape 16  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 8 July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 69  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee describes the nyertsang’s shiga (estate) and about collecting the yields from these as well as about the term of the chabu (manager) and the nyerpa (steward). He also talks about how the umdze gets appointed, the duties of the nyertsang and how the chabu gives out loans.   

---  
### Tape 16  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_16/M_0001_16.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What is the difference between the nyertsang and chabu of Gomang Tratsang (College)? How many shiga (estates) were there under the nyertsang? Was it 6 or 4?   

**A:**  There were 6: Gyeba, [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] Shiga, Shangdön, [Tib. ?], Nambar [Tib.རྣམ་པར] Shiga, Nyemo Barthang Kharnga [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་བར་ཐང་མཁར་རྔ] Shiga, Nyemo Jangra, [Tib. ljangra] Shiga, Dzem Sanggar [Tib. 'dzems ?] Shiga. From these, Gyeba Shiga and Shangdön Shiga and the branch shiga Gartog shiga were actually operated by the nyertsang and the rest were lent out on lease. The oil for the New Year Losar cookies came from Nyemo Barthang Kharnga Shiga. From Jangra we got some tsamba. As for Dzem Sanggar Shiga, we gave beans as a loan to the miser without interest starting from fist day of the 11th month and then in the spring we collected back wheat. This was called giving beans and collecting wheat, sentrödu, [Tib. སྲན་སྤྲོད་འབྲུ]. This shiga had 8 and a half tregang [Tib. ཁྲལ་རྐང]. We got 1,000 khe of wheat which was divided among the miser and they had to mill it and bring it to the monastery to be used for making flour for the fried cookie, kabse [Tib. ཁ་ཟས].   

**Q:**  Did they have to work on the fields as an ula in addition to this?   

**A:**  Yes. This was a tax for the monastery. They still had to work on the fields for the Shiga.   

**Q:**  Did you get the lease from the shiga in addition to this wheat?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you remember how many khe of land each shiga had?   

**Q:**  No.   

**Q:**  Do you send the shidü to some shiga?   

**A:**  Yes, we sent them to Gyeba and Shangdön.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu have the authority over this?   

**A:**  No. The nyertsang had the complete authority over this.   

**Q:**  The nyertsang was run by the private, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Doing nyertsang was hard but not bad if there was a good harvest. My shagtsang held the nyertsang and the harvest was not good and had a very hard time because we had to supply the traja all the time. The benefit from doing nyertsang was that you got a right of thön, [Tib. ཐོན] after the nyertsang was done and you could become a jiso candidate.   

**Q:**  Why was it different if you got a good crop or bad? What did you do with the grain?   

**A:**  We use the grain to buy butter for the traja, so it made a critical difference. We also got little bit butter from our nomad miser in Yangbajen, [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན] where there were about 40-50 households of nomads. Even now it is called Gomang Herd, [Tib. རུ་བ]. Then we also had nomad miser in Nyendrong [Tib. སྙན་གྲོང] where there were about 12-13 households it is the area just west of Damshung, [Tib. འདམ་གཞུང] and east of Yangpajen. Then in Chang Reting Kyangru [Tib. རྐྱང་རུ] we had little over 40 miser households. From these we got butter. Every 3 years we recounted the animals and recalculated the butter tax. From these we obtained about 500 khe of butter. We had some expenses at the time of calculation of animals. We had to give 5-6 khe of grain in Yangpajen and 5-6 of grain in Nyendrong to the tribe, tsopa to make chang for the lord of the tribe. There was a book that specified all these things; it was called [Tib. དེབ་སྦྱར]. At Kyangru we had to spend about 30-40 khe of tsamba on the nomads. For one week, each day each nomad miser got three ladle-full of tsamba and 3 teas per day. This was when we went to collect taxes. On the last day, we gave them thukpa of roughly ground barley, yörey [Tib. ཡོས་རལ] and at night we give bagthug with some meat. We also gave this to the beggars in this area. If they couldn't finish their thukpa they could take it home.   

**Q:**  Did the two nyertsang have to operate those two shiga or could they lease it out?   

**A:**  It was our choice. We had complete authority over what to do. We got from it whatever the yield was. We appointed 2 monks to act as shidü from the east nyertsang and the west nyertsang. We paid them each 40 khe of barley per year as the salary. We also sent one monk when planting the field which was called söngyab, [Tib. སོན་རྒྱབ]. He and the 2 shidü had to settle how much seed should be planted. Then there was a person who checked the harvest called töngyab, [Tib. སྟོན་རྒྱབ] sent at harvest time. He stayed until the grain was harvested and stored in the granary.   

**Q:**  Where is Shangdön located?   

**A:**  It is located in Tölung Boma on this side of the river where there are lots of leopards.   

**Q:**  Being a shidü was not a monk's obligation called the tax of the lower garment, [Tib. ཤབ་ཐབ་ཀྱི་ཁྲལ], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it appointed or they have to request it?   

**A:**  The shidü were chosen by the nyertsang from among their friends and trustworthy people who they thought were capable.   

**Q:**  Usually, the nyertsang would buy butter with the grain they got from the shiga and if it was not enough, they had to add it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At the normal traja, we gave 4 teas each session, and use 4 khe of butter per tea or 16 khe of butter per sessions. The scale nyaga was a little smaller than the others. And we use 8 bagjung for one tea. The tea was crumbled on the night before the traja and the nangma, gegö's servant and a representative of the labrang had to be there watching. When the butter was weighed, a wooden seal was stamped on it. Then they put the tea in the caldron and covered the pot.   

**Q:**  Who did the work like smashing the tea leaves?   

**A:**  The nyertsang's 2 inner nyerpa, nangnyer, [Tib. ནང་གཉེར] would check and weigh the butter. The checked tea was smashed on the square stone placed on the top of the Gomang Tratsang and then the nangma would put the tea in the cauldron, cover it and put a earthen seal on it and then the butter was sealed and carried back to the nyertsang for the night. The next day the nyertsang sent thabyog to take the butter out of storeroom. At that time, the nyertsang sent one monk called martunga [Tib. མར་སྲུང་བ] to ensure that thabyog didn't steal butter when it was time to put it in.   

**Q:**  Would they send one of their gidru to do this?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who would make the fire?   

**A:**  The thabyog.   

**Q:**  Was there a storeroom of the nyertsang different from that of the chabu? And did you have a name for it?   

**A:**  Oh yes. We had totally separate storerooms. On the top of the stone stair, there is a long storeroom and on the other side, there was a storeroom called Namsekhang [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་ཁང] where we store the butter and this is called Jishung [Tib. སྤྱི་གཞུང] Nyertsang. In these, we mainly stored butter and below that there was the storeroom of the west nyetysang. We would take some from these storerooms and then move it to the kitchen, rungkhang which is also called Jishung Rungkhang.   

**Q:**  Did the nyertsang have a cashier?   

**A:**  No. In addition to the traja, we also had to serve butter tea to the chabu everyday. There was also a gönkhang. In the gönkhang there were 9 monks doing the ritual for propitiating,[Tib. བསྐངས་བསོ] the protective deity Maha Kala, Gompo,[Tib. མགོན་པོ] every day. 4 of these were from labrang and 4 from nyertsnag and 1 from Kündeling, [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Labrang whose salary was also paid by the Kündeling. Everyday, we had to give our 4 monks a large iron ladle full [Tib. ལྕགས་གསར] of tsamba and the monks would put the tsampa in their wooden container called, pagphor, [Tib. སྤགས་ཕོར]. And we also gave a lesser amount of tsampa to all the nine monks and serve tea to all of them. Sometimes the labrang served the tea, but mostly we did.   

**Q:**  How were the storerooms opened and locked?   

**A:**  Each nangnyer had his own lock and both of them were needed to open the store.   

**Q:**  What was the term of chabu and nyertsang?   

**A:**  Nyertsang was 3 years, the chabu had no fixed term and it depended on the ability of the chabu. Samlo, Hamdong and Gungru had many tsondu members, but Badi had only about 10 monks in 1959 and there were not tsondu members. So whether their chabu was capable or not, we had to leave him there. So for the Badi, their chabu would stay there for years since they had no one else to substitute.   

**Q:**  Who selected the nyertsang?   

**A:**  The labrang abbot put forward the candidate of the nyertsang internally, but probably, it was appointed by the government. I don't remember clearly.   

**Q:**  We heard that it was just namely appointed by the government, but they would appoint the candidate that was submitted. Was the candidate put forward by the abbot?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there the custom of bribing the abbot?   

**A:**  Yes there was. The abbot also appoints the umdze and gegö, but the abbot had to ask the monk to be gegö, since no one wanted to do it.   

**Q:**  The gegö had the power. Why didn't the monks want to do this?   

**A:**  The gegö gets 11 additional alms share and the term is for 6 months and at the end he would have to pay each monk like 1-2 maotse which was called, the substitute of thukpa, [Tib. ཐུག་དོད] and in the past it was like 1-3 sho and also have to serve tea to the monks. According to our custom, during the summer retreat, [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས] the gegö should be a lagyüba and in winter it was pechawa. When I was small there was no difference of summer and winter. It didn't matter whether the gegö was bechawa and lagyüpa. But in winter, there was a class called thug chöra, [Tib. ཐུགས་ཆོས་ར] where the lagyüba gegö didn't understand how to do that because it was very complicated one and the gegö went back to the shag after the traja was over and the umdze had to do this. Therefore, they found that they needed a pechawa and since then, they changed the rule.   

**Q:**  Did the nyertsang bribe the abbot?   

**A:**  Yes, but there was no fixed amount and 1-2 dotse was okay as there wasn't so much rushing [Tib. འཚང་ཁ] for the position. There was also not much rushing for the umdze position. When I became umdze, there were at first 25 monks who wanted it. First they held a competition of voice. Then after comparing the voice etc., these were reduced to 5 candidates and then they did the senriy in front of the Deity Gompo and my name came out. There was no custom of selecting nyertsang by senriy.   

**Q:**  Did they do the senriy for the nyertsang?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  If you didn't become a nyertsang, you will not become jiso, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there a senior and junior nyertsang?   

**Q:**  Yes. There was east and west nyertsang. The east was considered senior and west as junior.   

**Q:**  What else does the nyertsang do besides serving the traja? Did they have to give alms?   

**A:**  They have something to do like paying little bit money salary. There is an endowment [Tib. ཐེབ་རྩ] for this that they give loans and use the interest for the salary.   

**Q:**  Then they needed to have a cashier, right?   

**A:**  No, they didn't need it.   

**Q:**  Who kept the money?   

**A:**  They divided the money among the two nyertsang. They then lend this and the capital is used for the money salary.   

**Q:**  How much of an endowment did they have? Was it like 100-200 dotse?   

**A:**  I don't remember how much the endowment, thebtsa, [Tib. ཐེབ་རྩ] was but from 50 dotse in the thebtsa, the monks get 1 tranka each.   

**Q:**  Were there about 4,000 monks?   

**A:**  There was more than 5,000 monks. The amount of the endowment was like early time and it was not allowed to increase it. Probably, the endowment was 2,500 sang = 50 dotse.   

**Q:**  Was there a limit for the interest when they give loans?   

**A:**  We lent it out at 20% interest, [Tib. བཅུ་སྐྱེད] although the tratsang's endowment rate was 16% [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྐྱེད] interest.   

**Q:**  How did they use this money profit they get from the difference between the interest?   

**A:**  The nyertsang got this profit and in the future and it was okay if you could hand over the capital. When we finished doing the nyertsang, we couldn't hand over the capital.   

**Q:**  At that time, didn't the debtors pay you the capital back?   

**Q:**  They paid the loan, but the expenses of the nyertsang was too much, so we had to borrow money from others to hand over the capital. At that time, we were made to suffer very much because the next one was a gidru of jiso nicknamed, "the tiger with torn up mouth, Takhare, [Tib. སྟག་ཁརལ]. I heard that when we became the nyertsang, it caused a great harm to Takhare, when we did the nyertsang because the Takare had to spend a lot for bribing. That's why they held the grudge though we didn't ask for the jiso because we were not capable of doing that.   

**Q:**  Was there anything to do with the crops?   

**Q:**  Yes the yield was also not that good.   

**Q:**  Was there any other expenditures?   

**A:**  We had to buy 500 khe of butter because we have to spend 1,000 khe. And the butter was expensive. Later, it was 50 sang for khe of butter where in the past, it was not that expensive.   

**Q:**  Did the nyertsang have animals to be leased?   

**Q:**  No we didn't. We collected the butter from the nomads. We also had some income from the forced selling, bamtsong pügyur, [Tib. འབམ་ཚོང་སྤུས་སྒྱུར]. We gave them 60 khata and they gave us 2 dre of dried cheese for each khata. Then also we gave them a basket of inferior tea produced from Lhoka called Lhoja, [Tib. ལྷོ་ཇ]. We get about 8 khe of butter for one basket of tea leaves. I did the nyertsang for 6 years and went to chang as the nangnyer. It would have been okay if I had stopped after doing three years. But I did three years more and then I got into trouble like the proverb, "the water pit covered with hay." [Tib. ཕུག་མའི་འོག་གི་ཆུ་དོང] When we sent the butter load to the nyertsang we would have to weigh it again in Lhasa. I did the job very honestly. When I received the butter from the nomads, if the leather for wrapping the butter is dry, I weigh it as it is and if the leather is wet, I would always reduce the weight of the wet leather. So from the next year they would not use the wet leather,   

**Q:**  Who had the right to permit the miser to pay the mibo?   

**A:**  We did it by ourself and the nyertysang had the authority to permit the mibo and we collect the mibo.   

**Q:**  Usually, did they pay you the mibo?   

**A:**  Yes they did. But there were very few who requested to pay their mibo during our time.   

**Q:**  In general, were there some of your miser paying the mibo?   

**A:**  Not many because they were treba.   

**Q:**  Were there people who came out side and stayed there and paid the mibo?   

**A:**  No. Mainly the shidü handled this matter and they didn't give much permission to pay the mibo except chödrö.   

**Q:**  What happened when families split and two sons take their bride, were they allowed to divide the tregang?   

**A:**  These are decided by the shidü. We did have one case in Yangbachen. A big family mother and father were getting into fight and the kids split into two groups also. Whatever divided advice we gave them they wouldn't listen and said they want to divide. So in the end, all the animals and things were divided. At this time they gave the nyertsang 4-5 best female yak as the offering for dividing, göpu, [Tib. བགོས་ཕུད]. [laughter] One of the nyertsang bought these to make it easier to handle and then left them with some one to look after. The chabu were in charge of deciding all secular-economic affairs of the tratsang. The 14 tsondu members meet but basically the chabu really made the decisions.   

**Q:**  If one of the sons said that he is going to Lhasa and he wants to pay the mibo, would he be allowed to do that?   

**A:**  Most probably not allowed among the farmers except the chödrö.   

**Q:**  Did he have to ask for the permission to get married?   

**A:**  The shiü would make all the decision and he would say that he had all the authority of the shiga since he paid the lease.   

**Q:**  What did the chabu do?   

**A:**  The chabu was the one who had all the authority over the tratsang whether he made it to have progress or let it down.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu have shiga?   

**A:**  Yes. They had less than the nyertsang. They had a grain storages in the following shiga; Phenpo Khardong [Tib. '[ཧན་པོ་མཁར་གྲོང] Shiga, Jangra Shiga. Tölung-Kyabo, [Tib. སྐྱར་པོ] Shiga, Nyen Shiga, [Tib. གཉེན, Phempo Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར] Shiga, Shandrön, Nambar Shiga, Nyemo Bathang Shiga, Dzem, [Tib. འཛེམ] Shiga and Gyeba Shiga.   

**Q:**  I heard there were 23 drunyer altogether. Were these grain storages for giving loans to people?   

**A:**  Yes. We sent two people to each grain storages.   

**Q:**  The chabu gave a lot of grain loans, right?   

**A:**  All these loans were given by chabu. I recall that the capital was about 100,000 khe included in hand and owed on paper. I know this because we had a book called tongdeb [Tib. gtong dep] in which it was written in detail about how much donggo the chabu had to give for the salary and for the traja and the donggo on the special rituals like düsang etc and the money salary. I don't recall all this now, but there was a book in which all of these were written. And the main tongdeb would be kept by the uchö. After the chöra was over then the chabu and the uchö meet and looked in this book, then we, the uchö would give the chabu sealed receipt saying on such and such a date the donggo was done and if the donggo is not given, then we would make a note of it. The uchö would do this but usually, the umdze did most of the work since he was in the office for longer time and gegö's term was just for 6 months.   

**Q:**  Who would keep the main book? When they did the accounting of the nyertsang, who would come to check it?   

**A:**  It was also the uchö who do that.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by uchö?   

**A:**  Uchö means umdze and gegö and when they said lama uchösum, [Tib. བླ་མ་དབུ་ཆོས་གསུམ], then it means the abbot, umdze and gegö.   

**Q:**  How many donggo did the chabu have to give on the düsang?   

**A:**  The chabu's biggest donggo is on the 15th of Sagadawa [Tib. ས་ག་ཟླ་བ].   

**Q:**  Was this a whole day tsog?   

**A:**  Yes. Usually, there were many düsang, but the most of the donggo on the düsang were given by the nyertsang; there was one day monthly chöra called Dachö, [Tib. ཟླ་ཆོས ] which had about 4-5 tsog where they served one thukpa in the morning and one thukpa in the evening and mostly they served torma thukpa, torthuk, [Tib. གཏོར་ཐུག].   

**Q:**  Where did the torma come form?   

**A:**  In the gönkhang there were two big torma; one made by the nyertsang with 25 khe of barley and there was one made by the Labrang with 25 khe of barley. We used this for making the thukpa. So we had 4 düsang. Then there was the Umey Semkye Düsang [Tib. དབུ་མའི་སེམས་སྐྱེས་དུས་བཟང], Tötrin Gyatso, [Tib. ? rgya mtsho] Düsang and Jamshe Düsang [Tib. འཇམ་བཞད], then there was a Jerimpoche's [Tib. རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] Düsang and Tsesum Düsang [Tib. ཚེས་གསུམ་དུས་བཟང]. On the Sagadawa Düsang, the chabu served vegetarian food.   

**Q:**  Regular traja was served by the nyertsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The chabu also had to pay the one khe of grain salary, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And the chabu also had the grain capital for paying the salary. Once when they did the accounting, they found that the chabu had about 200,000-300 000 khe of the grain. They had to submit the account to the government once every three years. But not too long before the revolt the common monks petitioned to have another accounting to see how much was really there and they said that they wanted the chabu to give more grain salary]. The monks said if there is a lot of grain we should get more grain salary. This went to the Branch Judicial System for settling the disputes, [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ] and they sent officials and did a detailed accounting, but they just did it according to the total number of grain we put under the account. Otherwise, they couldn't do the accounting one by one. And they did the accounting in the expenses of the tratsang by spreading small pay cards [on which the name of the items were written].   

**Q:**  The uchö had to go there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You get a lot of grain from the many shiga, but you had to spent about 5,000 khe, so wasn't the expenses kind of small amount? Did the chabu have to give the fried cookies?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  They gave one khe of barley to each monk and they had to spend about 4,000 khe, right?   

**A:**  They only gave it once from the Kyarpo Shiga.   

**Q:**  Where did the ngünyer's money go?   

**A:**  It went for giving the money salary.   

**Q:**  Did the ngünyer belong to the nyertsang or the chabu?   

**A:**  It was independent. They had three units which were completely separate from nyertsang and chabu. There was a two joint nyidrel, [Tib. ཉིས་སྦྲེལ] and three joint, sumdrel, [Tib. སུམ་སྦྲེལ] and four joint, shidrel, [Tib. བཞི་སྦྲེལ]. They had their own tongdeb listing their duties. The ngünyer sumdrel was also called chibgyur ngünyer, [Tib. ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་དངུལ་གཉེར] because it was in charge of the accommodation when the Dalai Lama visits Drepung.   

**Q:**  Who would appoint the ngünyer? The chabu or the tsondu? ngünyer?   

**A:**  They were appointed by the chabu alone. But at one it was hard to find people doing ngünyer, so the chabu started a new custom of the ngünyer getting thön and being able to wear resom, [Tib. རས་ཟོམ] boots.   

**Q:**  So ngünyer was given the thön like the ex-shengo and ex-chabu etc, right? Did the chabu have the power of giving the thön?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  People say that the chabu was powerful, but actually what kind of the power did it have? For example, the nyertsang did their own job, right?   

**A:**  The chabu's power was to embezzle the wealth of the tratsang. When the chabu meets, they definitely ate one meal and sometimes two and the tea was served all the time. Regularly, there were the labrang chandzö, Nayog, the khamtsen gegen of the Gungru and the Bati, 2 clerks and two Rabse Könyer [Tib. རབ་གསལ་དཀོན་གཉེར] who were the servants of chabu.   

**Q:**  When the chabu meet, what do they discuss and decide?   

**A:**  They dealt with all the matters about their miser, like giving the chödrö. And chabu did all the administrative works like renovating the tratsang.   

**Q:**  But they did not deal with the miser under the nyertsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What other power did they have?   

**A:**  They did all the work in the tratsang like buying things and making the religious decorations for the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu have nomads?   

**A:**  None in chang, but in Phembo they had a few nomad households. And in Tölung Nambar they had a few nomads.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu take care of renovating the tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the money of the ngünyer was used for paying the salary, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Because the ngünyer got the thön when they terminated, they gave the tratsang gifts. For example the chibgyur ngünyer made many religious decorations like covering the pillars. They would also ask for some different kind of donations like the donation for the summer propitiating the deities, yarsöl, [Tib. གཡར་གསོལ] etc. In fact, the ngünyer sumdre usually didn't just lend out money they engage in trade so that they could get some extra profit to leave for the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you ever use the extra money for adding it on the capital?   

**A:**  No. The ngünyer would save the extra money and give loans and when you get the interest; they added it on the capital.   

**Q:**  Did they ever think of adding the extra on the endowments?   

**A:**  No. At one time there were many monks doing tratsang chöndze. The reason was that in Gomang they had to serve only one traja and they use only 2-3 khe of butter. They had to offer 1,000 butter lamps in front of Tsongkhapa. But later some chöndze stopped offering the butter lamp. So later the chabu made a new rule. It said that they have to offer 1,000 butter lamps or leave an endowment, bungjog, [Tib. སྦུག་འཇོག] of 50 dotse to the tratsang for giving one tranka alms for each monk. In the past, the bungjog was 7 dotse. And they also have to use 8 khe of butter on the traja. But even after this there were many chöndze giving the tonggo. In the past, the uchö and the tratsang jama had to go to shag of the chöndze and weigh the butter and tea. But later they didn't do that.   

**Q:**  If some sponsors like a tsogchen trüku wanted to leave an endowment who would make the division? Was it the nyertysang or the chabu?   

**A:**  It was up to the sponsor and some leave a lot for the tratsang. They would give the alms on that day and they would write in the list of requesting prayers, kyabtho [Tib. སྐྱབ་ཐོ] that they would leave the endowment to the tratsang or ngünyer etc whatever they liked.   

**Q:**  Who selected the jiso candidates?   

**A:**  Probably, the labrang selected. I am not sure.   

**Q:**  The jiso term was 10 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So there would be the three candidates for each jiso, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the candidates go according to the seniority or did they just select them?   

**A:**  They selected them. If some one was the incumbent nyertsang, he would become the first candidate of the jiso.   

**Q:**  Who would select the candidates? Was it the labrang or the chabu?   

**A:**  Maybe the labrang and chabu did it jointly. I was among the candidates twice, but I don't remember clearly. Later, the jiso was run by the monastery itself, [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན] and they could do it just for 2 years. Trindor: But each jiso kept three shiga for themselves. [laughter]   

**Q:**  I heard from somebody that the monastery as a whole was called tsogchen, is this correct?   

**A:**  Yes. The tshogchen was the place where all the monks of the monastery assemble and the mangja was also served by the government. So it was something like the whole monastery was also called tsogchen. But if you say Drepung, then the whole monastery is included.   

**Q:**  For example, if I say that there are many monastic officials, lene, [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] in the tsogchen, how would people understand it?   

**A:**  If you say this, the lene of the tratsang was not included in this. Actually, tsogchen means the big assembly hall and doesn't have other meanings.   

**Q:**  Would the laji and the jiso include in the tsogchen?   

**A:**  Yes. jiso belonged to laji. The main in charge of the laji are the abbots.   

**Q:**  If you said the lene of the Drepung, this includes all the lene and how about if you say tsogchen lene?   

**A:**  If you say tsogchen lene, now people might understand it is the shengo. If you say gegö, it is the lene of the tratsang. Tsogchen Shengo was also called Tsogchen Gegö. In the past, people use the short form of Drepung, Dre in front of the name of the tratsang like Dre Gomang Tratsang etc.   

**Q:**  Can you say that Phodrang Deba is a title of the tsogchen?   

**A:**  No, you can't. Only in Drepung they have the palace, phodrang, [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང] of the Dalai Lama and it was said that the name Ganden Phodrang was originated from Drepung. So, the person who took care of that house was called Phodrang Depa and it belonged to our tratsang. This rotates among the 16 khamtsen. It had to be a böpa, so when a Mongolian or Amdo Khamtsen such as Shungba Khamtsen was going to be the turn, then a böpa should give bribe to get admitted in those khamtsen just before the Phodrang Depa turn comes and he will become the Phodrang Depa.   

**Q:**  So this turn came to the khamtsen once every 16 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When I was there, Shungpa Khamtsen got the turn and they did well.   

**Q:**  It seems to me that the Phodrang Depa didn't have much work.   

**A:**  Phodrang Depa probably had a good income and they have a large area of fields near the phodrang and the stable and they would plant them and they didn't need to pay a single grain to anybody.   

**Q:**  I heard that they also got the rents of the houses and with regard to these fields he also had control over the water for irrigation.   

**Q:**  Phodrang Depa also got the 40 alms share of the Dalai Lama's throne in the tsogchen.   

**A:**  Probably not. The alms share of the Dalai Lama's throne in the tratsang goes to the chipgyur ngünyer.   

**Q:**  How many alms share did the chabu get?   

**A:**  All the 14 tsondu members got 2 shares, so chabu also got 2 shares.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't the chabu get the three ex-extra shares from the line when they gave alms to the monks called, thondabarsum, [Tib. ཐིག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ]?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How many shares did the abbot get?   

**A:**  The abbot got 30 shares, gegö got 12 shares umdze 11 shares and in addition to that the uchö got the thondabarsum.   

**Q:**  How many shares did they get altogether?   

**A:**  They got a lot and they got three extra shares from the thondabarsum. Altogether they got 19 shares. For example, the gegö got his 10 shares, then he had 2 shares as the member of 14 tsondu and then 2 shares called shajug. Those who got thonthabarsum and shagju [Tib.] were the seven staffs, leja, [Tib. ལས་བྱ]; gegö, umdze, chabril, chabyog, nangma, jama and jagyog.   

**Q:**  It seems to be the chabu had a big responsibility, but the income was kind of small. Did they have shiga or fields? From where did they get their income?   

**A:**  As for the income, the tratsang was their home. [laughter] I am serious.   

**Q:**  If we think about the jiso, each jiso held 3 shiga and they got all the income. The chabu didn't have that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The chabu only came from the 4 nachen and they were the owner of the all the things in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  As for the embezzlement, they ate good daily food from the tratsang and then they had two alms shares. They didn't have any other incomes, right?   

**A:**  When they got to the shiga to do the accounting for the grain nyerpa, they probably got something.   

**Q:**  The chabu had the power to make the final decision to whom they gave the grain loans, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And they even got the fodder for their horses from the debtors.   

