# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.01: Tape 1  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 This interview includes a discussion of this individual's entrance into the monastery and the levels of study and the skills associated with each level. Also within this interview are issues of salary payments to the monastery and details of the distributions. There are also descriptions of the lagyüba's perspective on the Dalai Lama's divination at this time, as well as a discussion of the disturbance related to the chöra (monk's debating grove), and the interviewee's subsequent jailing for four days.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_01/M_0001_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell us how you first became a monk. Your own experiences.   

**A:**  I became a monk at age 7.   

**Q:**  How many family members did you have?   

**A:**  There were 8-9 persons in my household; grandfather, grandmother and my late mother. At that time, there were not many children.   

**Q:**  Who was your gegen (guardian/teacher)?   

**A:**  My gegen was my maternal uncle. He died in about 1963. We stayed as a household after 1959 (for awhile) and then I left the monastery.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I'm 68 years old. My home was around Trisam [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ] near Lhasa. According to our custom, I belonged to Kyormolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང] Tratsang, so I should have first become a monk in Kyormolung Tratsang and then come to Drepung. But I asked Kyormolung for the chödrö. Then I entered directly into Drepung. I had to ask for the chödrö [release from one's lord) or my vows wouldn't have been pure. One has to ask one's parents and one's lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] also, otherwise one's vows are not pure. This was a saying in the old society. I had to give 3 sho or 5 sho for the chödrö. From age 7-11, I was a monk in Gomang Tratsang and I studied düdra. There are 6 classes, one each year: khatog garmar, düdring, düchen , tagrik, lurik [These are the classes in düdra]. Every year we stay in one class. There are 8 chöthog in a year: some are monthly, dachö [Tib. ཟླ་ཆོས], some chöra are on the 20th (nyishu [Tib. ཉི་ཤུ]), and some chöra are on the 15th (Tib. jönga [Tib. བཅོ་ལྔ]). Based on these semesters, we take the exams before the tratsang uchö. We take the exams during a meeting.   

**Q:**  Are these studied before the tsenyi starts?   

**A:**  These are not tsenyi. After the 6 years of the (initial düdra) classes, then you have to start once again in class one with khatog garmar while studying tsenyi.   

**Q:**  Do you have to learn by heart the khatog garmar?   

**Q:**  These are the names of the classes like düdring and düchen in the düdra. When you start learning tagrik and lurik, then you start debating. After we have memorized the prayers recited in tsog and after one has finished lurik, then the exam is passed. Then we collect donations and there is a special prayer assembly (tsog) that is done at the end of lurik called lurik düsang [Tib. དུས་བཟང]. For this, the tratsang gegö and umdze would investigate and appoint an umdze from among the those boys with the best voices. There were some monks who are called dönsangnga [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་བ] who had their own organization to learn the prayer chantings of the tratsang. And in Gomang they sit in the prayer assembly meetings on the left and right sides of the front row. On the 24-25th of the 7th Tibetan month, the dönsangnga would assemble for one week.   

**Q:**  When you first came into the shag how many gidru were there?   

**A:**  Just me.   

**Q:**  Did your parents want you to join or did maternal uncle ask you to?   

**A:**  No. I asked myself, I wanted to be a monk like my uncle. So they made me a monk and I became the gidru of my maternal uncle.   

**Q:**  Did you know how to write before you entered the monastery?   

**A:**  No. My gegen found me a pechai gegan. My gegen, in order to make me learn better, sent tsamba and tea and had me live with my pechai gegan so I couldn't wander around. In that way I memorized all the tratsang's prayers recited in the assembly [Tib. འདོན་ཆོས].   

**Q:**  How did you learn to write and read?   

**A:**  There was no school in the monastery teaching the written form of the alphabet [Tib. དབུ་མེད]. My gegen had 3-4 other students. Two of us lived with the pechai gegan (one was his gidru) and later the other gidru, called Gendün Tashi [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བཀྲ་ཤིས], didn't stay in Drepung and went to Chushü Kharag [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར་ཁ་རག྄] and became a monk in the Büde Gomchen [Tib. སྦུད་བདེ་སྒོམ་ཆེན]. I didn't meet him later. There was another one who would come in the morning and leave in the evening.   

**Q:**  What was your tratsang?   

**A:**  I was in Gomang and within that in Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen and my mitsen was Hor.   

**Q:**  Did you have to do the shöndre?   

**A:**  Yes. I have to do the shöndre in the khamtsen and the mitsen. Later, just before the revolt I wasn't in the order of Drepung because I was [expelled], because I was jailed. The poor monks criticized me because I was the umdze. But I said I was from the üpong class. I had been promoted step by step through doing all the shöndre and became the tratsang umdze and you are saying I am trerim. At that time, all of the monks who are üpong also hoped some day that they could become a monastic official.   

**Q:**  Was your gegen a pechawa?   

**A:**  No he wasn't. I studied tsenyi for awhile and went to Jang Günchö, but I wasn't able to do keep on doing that because in the Iron-Tiger or Iron-Hare Year the tsogchen umdze died. Then the umdze of Gomang Tratsang got appointed as the umdze of the tsogchen. Then in the tratsang, there were about 30 odd youths from the dönsannga who had good voices and they had a competition of their voices. One day, the chabu, abbot, gegö and umdze came and we had a voice competition three times. In the end, there were three left as the final contenders for the tratsang umdze post. Then they did the senriy and rolled the three names in front of the protector deity Maha Kala, Gönpo [Tib. མགོན་པོ] and I was selected. I was 28 years old at that time. If I hadn't been selected umdze, I would have continued to study as a pechawa, but once I was umdze, I couldn't study pecha anymore. The post of umdze needs someone with a good voice and a large body. I did this until 1958. In the past in Gomang there were many students and geshe studying tsenyi and people say that Gomang Tratsang was the source of many scholars. During the 6 year term of each abbot it was expected that there would be 60 geshe graduates. But in recent times, only 2, 3, or 4 graduated. Because of this, the tse ga called us and asked why there were just a few geshe in Drepung where in the past the were so many geshe. Later when we examined this, we found that there were many geshe, but they had not completed their education in all the five main tsenyi texts [Tib. གཞུང་པུ་ཏི་ལྔ] like didn't learn the dzö [Tib. མཛོད] and düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ]. Therefore, the number of the new students learning tsenyi and the number of the passing geshe was unbalanced. So we thought this is not good and has to be changed. In general, there were over 4,000 monks in Gomang, but in the chöra, there were only 100-200 monks. The rest just took the name of the monk, but was wearing the mask of religion [Tib. ཆོས་འབག་གོན] but we didn't notice it. Actually, the discipline and the structure in Gomang was good; there was the laji and chabu and the 14 members of the tsondu and there were the khamtsen and the mitsen. But the number of geshe was declining. So we got the idea that we have to do something to reverse this trend. There was a danger in the future that the people might ask who were the monastic officials then. So we thought we must do something. The government's salary to the monks used to be distributed in the chöra. And monks, even those aged 75 to 80 used to come to the chöra to collect their salary. But these monks don't know their grade [Tib. འཛིན་གྲྭ] - they didn't even know which grade to sit in since they came so infrequently. So some of us thought that we should start paying the tratsang salary in the chöra and we started to discuss this among ourselves. Then they started this practice and did it once. We thought that if we pay salary in the chöra, more monks would come to the chöra.   

**Q:**  What is the difference if you paid the salary in the chöra?   

**A:**  If we paid the salary in the chöra, with the exception of the ones with special privileges, all will come to the chöra and the assembly in the chöra will become big. We wouldn't have to say come specially to study pecha but just by coming 2, 3, 4, or 5 times they will get into the habit of learning pecha. But later it didn't work out.   

**Q:**  What kind of salary was paid by Tibetan Government?   

**A:**  It was paid in money in the chöra.   

**Q:**  Was there a fixed amount?   

**A:**  No. This was just the left over from performing the rituals. We got this idea [to pay the tratsang salary in the chöra], in the past the tratsang salary was paid in the area near the main gate [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར], but later trouble occurred over it and two ideologies [Tib. ལྟ་བ] developed.   

**Q:**  After you got the idea, how did you go about doing it? Did you ask the abbot?   

**A:**  We asked the abbot and the 16 khamtsen (under Gomang tratsang).   

**Q:**  Who was the abbot then?   

**A:**  First the abbot was Chömphel Jamyang [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] then at the time of the trouble it was Kelsang Lengden [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ལེགས་ལྡན]. It was in 1958.   

**Q:**  What did the abbot say?   

**A:**  He said it was a good idea and agreed. The other main supporters were the abbots' chandzö, the senior, Samlo Drepa [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ་བགྲེས་པ] the Karam [Tib. བཀའ་རམ] gyorpön and an Amdo pechawa and me. These were the main ring leaders [Tib. གཏེ་པོ]. The Samlo Drepa was in the same shag as the abbot. Our plan was to make more pechawa. For example, the custom is to have 60 geshe passed during each abbot's 6-year term, but even if we got 30-40 it would be okay. However, we were having only 1-2-3 geshe a year. At this rate, it looked like the geshe would definitely become finished. The abbot was the main one who tried to do something, but it didn't work.   

**Q:**  How many monks came to mangja?   

**A:**  Maybe 300-400 monks on the regular four mangja.   

**Q:**  Who first came up with the idea. Was it you?   

**A:**  We were the ones who started.   

**Q:**  How many people were there?   

**A:**  This was backed by the majority of the pechawa. At that time, the pechawa and the lagyüba became two sides. Our idea was supposed to be the idea of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  When you asked the abbot, your idea became the same, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  According to the monastery's charter [Tib. སྒྲིག་གཞི], after asking the abbot, then to whom do you have to ask?   

**A:**  Our first strategy was to ask the abbot whether he agreed and he did. Then we asked the Dalai Lama for the divination regarding whether it was good to pay the salary in the chöra. Then the lagyüba said we won't agree and we won't accept this because this is a new rule that we didn't have in the past [Tib. སྔར་མེད་གསར་སྤྲོས]. And then the trouble got worse. There was an office in charge of performing additional rituals in the Jokhang, I am not sure but it was probably called Nangsi Shaphar Lekhung [Tib. སྣང་སྲིད་ཞབས་འཕར་ལས་ཁུངས]. They came as mediators. At this time, we thought the mediators were not in favor of paying salary in the chöra, so we didn't accept their mediation. Then the monks made an commotion and beat us up and then we were called to the tse ga in Norbulinga and about 30 some lagyüba were expelled and I [I was umdze] and the abbot's' chandzö, the karam gyorpön, the Amdo and the Samlo Dreba and another pechawa were beaten by the monks.   

**Q:**  How did this happen? Were those dobdo who beat you?   

**A:**  We got a message from the chabri saying come to a tratsang tsondu. We went and the monks and dobdo were waiting there and they pretended to report the matter. Then they tied us to pillars and beat us. This was my first struggle session [laughter]. This was in 1958.   

**Q:**  Was there any discussion before the beating?   

**A:**  No none. It was really a struggle session. There were about 30-40 dobdo in front who grabbed us. At this time, we didn't have any idea who was backing the dobdo from behind the scene. After the revolt, in jail, we found out it was Thubten Tserin [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་རིང] the ex-abbot of Düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ] and Takhare, the Jiso. Later they confessed that they stirred up the dobdo.   

**Q:**  Did the 14 members of the tratsang tsondu have any discussions? How many meetings did they hold?   

**A:**  No discussions. They only had one meeting but it was of no benefit because most people in the tsondu were on the lagyüba's side.   

**Q:**  Who had the authority change the salary distribution?   

**A:**  The abbot. But in the 14 tsondu members there were more lagyüba. On our side there were the abbot's chandzö and the Samlo Drepa who both were in the abbot's shagtsang. That's why they were expelled. Nothing happened to the abbot.   

**Q:**  Did the abbot say that you have to do that?   

**A:**  Yes. And after that the laji also talked in between, but they didn't listen to it.   

**Q:**  When the abbot said that the salary should be given in the chöra, the lagyüba didn't listen, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In essence, the abbot's order was not accepted by the lagyüba. They said, "You have made a new rule which didn't exsist in the past."   

**Q:**  Did you submit a petition to the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  We submited the request for the divination.   

**Q:**  How did you ask for the divination?   

**A:**  We asked the Dalai Lama for divination saying the Tratsang's studies are declining, the government salary is paying in the chöra and there is a big gathering of monks, so please do the divination, and whether it is good or not to pay the tratsang salary in the chöra? He answered it is good to do it in chöra. Because of this divination, we didn't listen to the mediation.   

**Q:**  Who asked for the divination?   

**Q:**  We, the pechawa, asked for the divination.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the Potala?   

**A:**  We asked via Kündeling Dzasa Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན].   

**Q:**  He was part of your group?   

**A:**  Yes. Things weren't settled until the 16th of the 12th lunar month when the pechawa returned. The pechawa left for Jang Günchö on the 1st of the 11th month. They returned on the 16th of the 12th month. The pechawa thought that they should not go to Jang Günchö because if they went, the remaining pechawa might have problems. But the umdze said you must go. Otherwise there will be one problem put on top of another. It's better if you go. The lagyüba knew that most of the pechawa were at Jang Günchö and it was this time that they started beating pechawa. Now in retrospect, I think that was the correct decision. The reason for this is that because most of the pechawa had gone to Jang Günchö, the lagyüba were able to beat a few of us, but if the mass of the pechawa were there, then two large groups would have confronted each other and there would have been a big fight. This didn't happen.   

**Q:**  When did you ask the Dalai Lama for the divination? Did the Nangsi Ritual Office do the mediation in Lhasa or in Drepung?   

**A:**  It was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you attend this meeting?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What can you tell us about it?   

**A:**  I can't say much about it.   

**Q:**  Who was the main leader of the Nangsi Ritual Office?   

**A:**  The main person was Trunyichemmo Bumthang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང]. It was held in the Khamsum [Tib. ཁམས་གསུམ] where there were many people. At that time, it was kind of a chaotic situation and I didn't see well.   

**Q:**  Did the representatives of both sides have to talk?   

**A:**  No we didn't have to. The officials announced the written mediation decision, dumtra [Tib. འདུམ་ཁྲ], to us. We refused to accept this mediation.   

**Q:**  Did the lagyüba accept this?   

**A:**  It seemed that they kind of accepted it.   

**Q:**  What was in the dumtra?   

**A:**  I don't remember exactly but it was unfavorable to us. It said that the salary should not be paid in the chöra so we didn't accept it. The Nangsi Office also gave the pechawa some money. The other side didn't get any money. It is a custom for the mediator to do this. I don't remember this too well. Since we didnt accept the mediation I didn't pay too much attention to it. It has been about 40 years.   

**Q:**  Did they beat you when they beat the other people in Gomang?   

**A:**  Yes, not too badly. They tied us to a pillar a little bit and they also searched our pouches of the robe, but I had nothing because being a monk we are not allowed to do reckless things. I heard that they [lagyüba] themselves had guns and the guns fell out in the kitchen.   

**Q:**  Who was the ring leader of lagyüba?   

**A:**  The one now living in Sera called Wöser Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama's divination done before they issued mediation document?   

**A:**  It was after the Dalai Lama's divination, so we started insisting on paying the salary to the chöra. That is why we refused to accept when the laji called and said something when the Nangsi Office did the mediation.   

**Q:**  What did the lagyüba say about the Dalai lama's divination when they refused to accept that?   

**A:**  They said, "Actually they didn't ask for the divination and they just made it up." Out of 4,000 monks in Gomang, in reality there were only about 400 true students of pecha.   

**Q:**  What did the rest of the monks do?   

**A:**  They were doing farming, business and stealing. That's what they really did. At this time, some monks went to Tsöna [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ] and India to trade and became bankrupted in business so they stole things and they were caught and beaten in jail. Then they quietly came back to the monastery and acted like regular monks. These kinds of behavior are called "wearing a religious mask", chöbagön [Tib. ཆོས་འབག་གོན] but after the revolt the Communist Party put the religious mask on us and we wore it. Whatever work you do, you have to do it truthfully. These kinds of behavior will get their accounting like the saying in the old society, "the Lord of Death is more ferocious than this lord and the future life is much longer than the present life" [Tib. དཔོན་འདི་ལས་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་འཇིགས་སྐྲག་ཆེ། ཚེ་འདི་ལས་གཏིང་མ་ཤུལ་ཐག་རིང]. Everybody has to go through this. If you don't be careful and say that one is great, there will be a problem.   

**Q:**  What would be the sense of making dobdo sit in the chöra? They won't learn anything; why not just pay the pechawa more special salary?   

**A:**  That would have resulted in more pechawa, but if we did this it would have caused even more comments [Tib. ལྟ་སྟངས]. It will be quite hard for us to do that. If we paid the pechawa more salary, the problems would have increased because everyone said that all the monks are equal. If we did this, it would have been good and would have resulted in more pechawa, but the lagyüba would have said all monks are equal and now you are making distinctions among the monks. Secondly,if we were to pay this kind of money, we have no capital for this, so the tratsang chabu would have to pay it. However, the chabu and lagyüba had the same way of thinking of this, like the proverb, "the disease caused by the same devil" [Tib. གདོན་གཅིག་ཟིན་གྱི་ན་ཚ]. So there was no way for this to occur. Mainly the Labrang (the abbot) had saved up money and gave us a little bit from time to time and we, the uchö also did like that and gave a little bit money like 1-2 sang or 5 sho on the chöra. Even for this, the lagyüba made a little comment. In reality, if you are a monk, then you should study tsenyi, if not you will not be regarded as a monk. But they say that they want money even it is one fen and they don't want to work. At this time, we didn't say a word about paying pechawa more money since this would have been considered making distinctions among monks though it would been good in the long run future. But later, after they threw us out of the monastery, the Tibetan Government gave 4-5,000 dotse as capital to Gomang (for this) to be given to the chöra. A special cashier, ngünyer [Tib. dgnul gnyer] was appointed to handle this money to give additional income to help the pechawa. We never got any of it.   

**Q:**  This was like an endowment [Tib. མ་རྩ] for the livelihood supplement [Tib. འཚོ་སྣོན] of the pechawa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was this for the Jang günchö?   

**A:**  No. It was for the chöra.   

**Q:**  Did they beat you by hand or stick?   

**A:**  They beat us with switches [Tib. རྒྱུག་པ་ཕྲ་པོ].   

**Q:**  How did they catch you?   

**A:**  They held the meeting, then they grabbed us and tied us to the pillar. They tied up the Samlo Drepa, the Labrang's chandzö, the an Amdo monk from the Shungba [Tib. གཞུང་པ] who died the year before last year, and me. The Karam gyorpön heard something or had suspicions, so he fled from the monastery.   

**Q:**  He is now in New York and I met him.   

**A:**  His name is Thubten Wangyal [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་དབང་རྒྱལ]. They released us and made us stay in Rabsel [Tib. རབ་གསལ] in the Tratsang for 4 or 6 days, like under house arrest. The tratsang gave us food during this time.   

**Q:**  Where was the abbot?   

**A:**  He was in the Labrang and nothing happened to him because he would not attend the meeting. It would have been inappropriate to invite the abbot to the meeting so they invited the Labrang's chandzö instead.   

**Q:**  Who sent you the message to come to the meeting?   

**A:**  The chabril and chabyog would send the message for the meeting.   

**Q:**  What kind of meeting did you think it was going to be?   

**A:**  We thought it was the tsongdu with 14 members; This tsondu included the 5 chabu and Labrang chandzö, 2 clerks, the 2 uchö. This was the usual meeting, but the uchö wouldn't always come. This assembly also had the 4 nachen; the gegen of the four large khamtsen: Samlo, Hamdong, Bati and Gungru. Then they added the 2 clerks and it became the tsondu of 16 members.   

**Q:**  What about the 2 representatives from the other 12 khamtsen?   

**A:**  They are the nayog [Tib. སྣ་གཡོག]. They don't count them in the tsondu. This tsondu is the middle size one and they all had the extra shares of salary and the alms.   

**Q:**  When you went to the meeting, did you see the monks waiting there?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did you suspect trouble?   

**A:**  I didn't have any doubts. I thought it was a meeting. I didn't think such things would happen because we were doing work for the benefit of the Buddhism. But some others may have had some doubts and some of them said that they are not going to the Jang Günchö, but I told them it will be not be good if you didn't go there. In the beginning, we were supposed to do something stable and calm [Tib. བརྟན་ལྷིང] but later it became like this.   

**Q:**  What did you think when they grabbed you? Did you think they would kill you?   

**A:**  I didn't think they would kill me. And even if they killed me, I wouldn't care because I was single minded [Tib. བློ་གཅིག]. I was involved because I believed in this, not because someone incited me to do it. First I was a lene and secondly I had studied some pecha though I couldn't complete it. If I could help other pechawa, I will have the same result. Karam Gyorpön and I were working wholeheartedly [Tib. བློ་གཅིག་སེམས་གཅིག].   

**Q:**  The main ones in your groups were you and Karam gyorbön and then there were the abbot's chandzö and the Samlo Drepa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What happened during the four days you were under arrest? Did they talk with you?   

**A:**  No, they didn't come to beat us and they didn't talk to us. They were acting as if they had won the victory. Even now they are still holding [different] kind of view [Tib. ལྟ་སྟངས] to me like the proverb, "the meadow has become white, but the rabbit still smells the green grass" [Tib. སྤང་སྐྱ་ཐག་ཆོད་ཀྱང། རི་བོང་སྔོ་ཐག་མ་ཆོད] But I just feel pity [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ] on them.   

**Q:**  At that time, was there any threat against the life of the abbot?   

**A:**  No. He was just staying in the labrang.   

**Q:**  The abbot then was Kelsang Lengden, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did they settle matter after some time?   

**A:**  Then they released us and soon after that the government issued the verdict [Tib. བཀའ་དཔྱད] for these people and we were called to the tse ga at Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Who were called there?   

**A:**  All of the people who were to be expelled were called.   

**Q:**  How many of you were expelled from your side?   

**A:**  Samlo Drepa, Karam gyorpön, Labrang's chandzö and Amdo Yeshe and me and about 35 from the other side. They were made to do prostration at tse ga for a week. This was in winter. It was in Norbulinga in Kelsang Phodrang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཕོ་བྲང]. The trouble occurred before the monks returned on the 16th of the 12th month from Jang günchö.   

**Q:**  At first did they hold a kind of meeting when they issued the verdict?   

**A:**  No meeting.   

**Q:**  If they issued the verdict, it must be drönyerchemmo Phala Thubten Wönden [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འོད་ལྡན]?   

**A:**  Yes. At tse ga, they read the verdict to us and then later they gave the verdict to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did they write the crimes of each people in the verdict?   

**A:**  In the verdict, there was the list of names to be expelled but no list of their crimes.   

**Q:**  Did you have to leave your shag right away?   

**A:**  No, we were allowed to stay in the shag. We were expelled from the kyidu of the monastery.   

**Q:**  But you didn't leave the monastery.   

**Q:**  If I didn't stay in the shag, there is no way to make the living.   

**Q:**  But you couldn't go to prayer assembly, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So how did you make your living during that one year?   

**A:**  I had my 2 gidru in the shag and there were 2 gegen. So I stayed reading pecha in the shag until the revolt.   

**Q:**  If you stay in the monastery, they didn't say anything, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

