# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. sgo mang dbu mdzad chen mo, dge 'dun nyi ma]  


**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. sgo mang dbu mdzad chen mo, dge 'dun nyi ma]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
---  
## Abstract  

Within this interview are various details of monastic life that include discussions on how the tratsang eliminated the dobdo, issues related to the profits certain monks made on the sale of horses and details of this history. Additionally, the interview contains issues related to the nyertsang's jobs and responsibilities, and the daily activities of members of the monastery such as debate sessions.
  
---
### Tape 4  
**A:**  With regard to the use of the 70,000 dayang from the sale of wood to the Chinese, because the chabu blocked my suggestion to give this to the monks, I specially decided that a group of 8 should oversee this trust [i.e. not just chabu]. I didn't have any hope of becoming famous. I was interested only in helping the livelihood of the monks. And I have no regrets over speaking on behalf of the pechawa and being expelled from the monastery. Mainly, it is all the karmic result of my past lives. I tried to do good but got bad results for myself, I think it must be the result of previous lives.   

**Q:**  If a monk violates a religious rule and lost his celibacy and did something against the rule, it would be settled by the abbot and the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and the gegö has tremendous power. He holds the tratsang charter [Tib. bca' yig]. If the gegö is a strong willed person, he not only can expel regular monks, he can expel even the chabu if the chabu did something wrong. The power to settle issues that involve the monastery as a whole rests on the shengo. If the shengo can't settle an issue, then the laji is convened. In the laji there are abbots, ex-abbots, shengo, tshogchen umdze, phodrang depa [Tib. pho brang sde pa] these were the high laji and under that that there were Parkhangdepa [Tib. par khang sde pa] Chökhangdepa [Tib. mchod khang sde pa] and the khamtsen gegan of Hamdong [Tib. har gdong] and Samlo [Tib. bsam lho]. These were middle laji. And the jiso is also in the high laji. The head of the laji is the Senior Abbot, Khenpo tripa [Tib. mkhan po khri pa] who is the highest senior among all the ex-abbots in Drepung. During my time as umdze, the Khenpo tripa was an ex-abbot Gyeba Khenpo Jungne La [Tib. rgyas pa mkhan po 'byung gnas lags]. The middle Laji "dringa" [Tib. 'bring ba] contains, in addition the parkang depa, chökhang deba and two khamtsen gegan of Hamdo and Samlo.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us how the Gomang Tratsang eliminated the eating commune, tobtsang [Tib. ltob tshang] of dobdo? Who was the person holding the power?   

**A:**  The main decision about this was made by the abbots and the gegö. The Gomang abbot eliminated the dobdo tobtsang and made them to start studying pecha. In the tratsang, the abbot mainly deals with studying pecha and the gegö would support it, but the gegö would get changed in 6 months. In winter the gegö is done by the geshe and in summer it was done by the lagyüba. I was also a lagyüba who is not broadminded and was kind of carefree [Tib. skyid po 'dra po], so I couldn't control the monks very much. At this time, if we made 20 some monks in the tobtsang to study pecha, probably at most 1 or 2 could study pecha. At this time, I had no authority to control them and tell them to study pecha. The gegö even has the power to expel the umdze, if the umdze did something wrong, though usually the umdze and gegö have the equal seats.   

**Q:**  So the gegö is the judge, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the dobdo protest when their tobtsang was eliminated?   

**A:**  No they didn't.   

**Q:**  Whose idea was this first to end the tobtsang? Was it the abbot or the idea of the 14 tshondu members?   

**A:**  No it wasn't. The government gave the order at the time of the audience after the Jongyu [Tib. ljongs rgyu] where the monks go far away. I don't remember the year. I had been umdze for 5 years (in 1954 we think), at this time the tse ga told all the Gomang monastic officials, lene [Tib. las sne] to wait for a moment.   

**Q:**  Was this in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes. So after finishing the audience in Norbulinga and the rest of the people returned, the Gomang officials stayed behind and Phala [Tib. pha lha] Drönyerchemmo told them that Gomang used to be the source of many great scholars, but nowadays, the study have become declined [Tib. nyag phra]. This is because you lene are not doing your job capably. Then we were saying that if we didn't do something according to this there will be lot of trouble. Actually, in one abbot's period, we should produce 60 geshe, but now there are only 2-3 a year, some time in the future, one geshe migt have to take 2-3 exams. So something has to be done and the abbot also took this matter seriously. At that time, the abbot was Chönphel Jayang la [Tib. chos 'phel 'jam dbang lags], but he couldn't do it effecively [Tib. shugs chen po]. Then the abbot Kelsang Lengdenla [Tib. skal bzang legs ldan lags] took over and during his time he was trying to do something strongly and we tried to do something on the monk's salary, but due to the hindrance caused by the karmic result against the Buddhism as a whole and also to the tratsang, it didn't work out.   

**Q:**  Did the elimination of dobdo tobtsang occured before your trouble?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us in detail about the dobdo tobtsang event and what did you do at that time? After Phala gave the order did you discuss how to eliminate the tobtsang?   

**A:**  There was no convening of the 14 tsondu member. The abbot in consultation with the gegö decided it. They called all the dodbo tobtsang and told them, "from tomorrow on, you cannot do tobtsang any more. And the younger dobdo have to study pecha." The dobdo accepted and they discussed among themselves and they went through the motions of giving all their pots and other things to the tratsang and they also made some offerings to the monks and the young doddo were sent to study pecha. For a few months they came to chöra, but it seemed to me that gradually the tobtsang might have started again.   

**Q:**  Do you mean that they started the tobtsang again stealthily?   

**A:**  There was nothing much anyone could do about this. Gomang's chagde [Tib. phyag bde], tea and thukpa servers were all dobdo. The tratsang lene, no matter how much they beat them to stop the pushing, the dodbdo say the beating doesn't hurt them and couldn't stop them from pushing. Some dobdo were beaten so badly that their shoulders and arms swelled up and they couldn't take off their vest without cutting it off, but after a few days they were healed and were back doing the same thing again.   

**Q:**  Did they have the idea of geting rid of this?   

**A:**  No. If the dobdo just push and shove, they aren't beaten, but if they spill porridge and fall, then they would get beaten like the proverb, "stamping people when they fell" [Tib. 'gyel ba'i sgang la rdog brdzis]. If they could just push and don't spill the thukpa, then it was okay. The beatings are done by gegö, nangma, chabril, jama and the chabril beats them with a pen holder, nyugdrog [Tib. smyug sgrog].   

**Q:**  They say that they put salt in the pen holder?   

**A:**  They probably didn't put salt in it and it was not allowed too. The jama holds a large horse head shaped key with a leather strip, but they don't beat them much with key, but they just hit them with the leather strip. If a gegö beats dobdo he would hit them with a switch on the back 7-8 times which hurts a lot. The switch is wet.  The jama stays in kitchen while the porridge is being made, but once it is finished, he comes into the assembly hall and stands there overseeing. There is saying, "the monk's life is passed under the switch" [Tib. grwa pa'i 'tsho ba rgyag pa 'og nas skyel], but they still didn't get bored of it [Tib. bsun yas yod ma red].   

**Q:**  I met some lagyüba who told me that the pechawa are working for themselves and the lagyüba and the dobdo are the ones who really work for the monastery's benefit. What do you think about this?   

**A:**  You should tell them that if what the lagyüba said is right, you can be the tratsang abbot. [laughter] If they can do that, there is no need of the pechawa and then we are wrong in our view. But it is the not the case that if one study the pecha, it is not that he is not allowed to work. At first when we became monk we were saying that we came to study and to practice religion and we leave our white chupa with our mothers and put on the red robes of the Buddha. But in these days (present), monks are wearing garments on top of monk's robe. These were not permitted. When you first became the monk, you agree that from now on I'll wear only Buddha's robes. But when we were small we also wore some laymen's clothes. Even I wore some.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: I was born in Namling [Tib. rnam gling] and there is a famous monastery called Shang Ganden Chönkhor [Tib. shangs dga' ldan chos 'khor] which is a Gelugpa Monastery and the monastery of the Gen Thabkhe la [Tib. rgan thabs mkhas lags]. When I went there in 1955-56, I had some friends who were dobdo and they go to chang to collect gifts, büdü [Tib. 'bul sdud] and trade for the nyertsang and some of them do trade and some even bought animals from the nomads and sold animals to the butchers [Tib. dmar khe] in Lhasa and Shigatse. I saw and heard about 1-2 of these. Is there anything like this in Gomang?   

**A:**  Yes there was. In fact, there was a geshe though not of the highest level, but was a real geshe, who died in the year before last year or last year, so monks were calling him as Geshe Sheba, Geshe Butcher [Tib. dge bshes bshas pa]. I swear by the Buddha statue in the Jokhang that the monks call him in that way. This monk also did horse trade. Selling the horse like the people called lorok [Tib. lo ro ba] and he also did butcher trade [Tib. bshas tshong]. When the geshe did this business, he lived at home in Tölung [Tib. stod lung] not in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Was he a geshe who passed the geshe exam?   

**A:**  Yes. Though he was not a high level geshe, he should have known what should be done and what should not be done. This is like what the lagyüba said.   

**A:**  When the geshe was selling the horse and animals to the butcher, had he lost his celibacy?   

**A:**  I think he had not really lost his celebacy because he was quite old. He was living like a monk and died in that way.   

**Q:**  Did this happen before 1959?   

**A:**  Since before 1959, until the year before last year and last year.   

**Q:**  At that time, wouldn't the lene of the monastery tell him that it is wrong?   

**A:**  They wouldn't say much. That's why usually the dobdo used to say, "if a dobdo loses their celibacy it is considered that he was corrupted or burned by wealth generated from religion such as receiving too much alms and offerings [Tib. dkor gyis 'tshig] but if a geshe loses his celibacy it is said that it is a hindrance on his dharma pratice [Tib. chos kyi bar chad]." This is also similar to this saying.   

**Q:**  Did you monks at this time ever think that it might be better to have 3,000 monks who do good prayers rather than having 10,000 monks in Drepung?   

**A:**  Oh no (emphatic). We were hoping and trying to have as many monks as we could have and that will be the best. Then tshog and chöra will become very large. If there are many monks who came to attend chöra this is the monk's work. Like the proverb, "if some one leaned against the golden mountain, all of the surrounding will become gold." [Tib. gang zhig gser gyi ri la bsnyes gyur na/de yi 'dabs bya thams cad gser du 'gyur] [Meaning if you stay with a good person, you will also become good]  It is better to have more monks. The problem was the lene officials of the monastery didn't do the right thing. The government had given the monks many chöshi. If most of the income from the chöshi was given to the monks though they could have stored a little bit, then if the lene told the monks to study well, they will listen to them. In the past, the monks who didn't study couldn't stay in the monastery, but later though there was a strict discipline. The lene didn't do well and it became like geshe are not allowed to work and the shengo was only done by the lagyüba. Actually, if the geshe become shengo and gegö, it would be very good and when they talk on the assembly, it will be a different one because they will talk according to the religion. It is said that the Buddhism is depended on the monks' community. But if the monks didn't study pecha it will not depend on the monks even though there is a large number.   

**Q:**  What is the difference of the duties between chabu and nyertsang in Gomang?   

**A:**  The 2 nyertsang's work is for giving donggo for traja etc. The tratsang has several chöshi, they collect the yield from these and also have nomads who took the animals as a lease [Tib. she] in Yangbajen [Tib. yangs pa can], Nyenrong [Tib. snyan rong] and there was also a household called Kyangru [Tib. rkyang ru]. From these nomads they get 500 khe of butter in one year as the lease. In one year Gomang needs 1,000 khe of butter for the traja etc., so we have to find another 500 khe of butter for use. The two nyertsang have a good thön [Tib. thon] because after they are finished their term of nyertsang then they were allowed to go for the candidates of the jiso. The nyertsang work is not easy, if you don't have a good harvest year, it is mostly a loss for the holder. E.G., in one year, there are 8 session chöthog; 4 monthly chöra, dachö [Tib. zla chos] and 2 chöra on the 20th, 2 chöra on the 15th and the total is 190 days). For one dachö the nyertsang have to give 25 traja each month. Then the monks have to go to beg for fire wood shinglong [Tib. shing slong] for 4 days and 1 day is on the road for attending the assembly. That's how the 30 days are calculated. So there were 25 traja in a month when there is chöra, when they weigh the butter, they use the scale called tongnyag [Tib. stong nyag] which is little smaller than the usual scale. And they use 4 khe of butter for each traja. When they put in the butter and tea, a representative from the labrang and a representative from the gegö would come and weigh the tea and butter.   

**Q:**  If they couldn't collect it from the shiga they have to pay their own money and buy these, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then the nyertsang's job is basically giving the traja?   

**Q:**  How much butter did you have to put on the traja on the 20th and the 15th?   

**A:**  It is the same 4 khe for each tea.   

**A:**  Yes, and if there isn't enough yield from the shiga then they have to pay for it themselves. For nyishu chöra, they give 16 traja. And three days for shinglong and 1 day on the road. Shinglong used to be the custom when monks go for begging for firewood. But in my time they no longer did this and it is just a name. However, there is one shinglong in Jang günchö, the monks have to cross the mountain pass and go to the upper part of place called Gyer Lhapa [Tib. ?lha pa]and for one day they go to get firewood. The upper part of Gyer Lhapa is all forest. The monks cut the trees and carry some on their backs. That night, they ask for the lodging in the shiga called Gyer Lhapa. The shiga gives them 4 tea and 4 thukpa and a ladle size serving of tsamba. That night they do the tshog and they sleep in a big house where hay is stored. And the next day they return via Jangme [Tib. 'jang smad] which was a shiga of Ratö [Tib. ra stod]. There they stop for a meal and they get 4 tea and 4 thukpa. Then they return to Jang güncho area and leave the wood they carry to the kitchen. Then they have a tsog and they get tea. The monks in this time, since they don't go for shinglong, they go to park during the days that are specified as shinglong. The 15th chöra has 12 days of tea and 2 days of shinglong and 1 day of travel. The dachö will end on the 3rd of the month. Just before ending the dachö on 30th of the month there is a dachö düsang [Tib. dus bzang] and they get five times of tea and thukpa. Morning and evening they get a thugba and between they get 3 teas. The thugba is tsamthug. The tsamba soup. Then in the protectiveb deity chapel, gönkhang [Tib. mgon khang] there are two kinds of torma; one is made by the labrang and one by nyertsang. The nyertsang's chöpa requires 25 khe of roughly grounded barley [Tib. rjen hral].   

**Q:**  Is there traja on the break session chöntsam [Tib. chos mtshams]?   

**A:**  No there isn't. There were traja only on chöthog. The chabu has only one donggo to give. There is one on the 15th of 4th month in which the chabu give three high quality vegetarian gruel [Tib. ming btags].   

**Q:**  Were there other duties of the chabu? Is the responsibility of the chabu mainly on salary?   

**A:**  The chabu has to pay a little bit of salary and they have the endowment [Tib. ma rtsa] for paying that, but mostly it is the cashier, the ngünyer [Tib. dngul gnyer], who had the endowment and they pay the salary.   

**Q:**  But the main person in charge of the ngünyer was the chabu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the three types of ngünyer?   

**A:**  The three joint ngünyer handles the fund of the expenses for the visit by the Dalai Lama to Drepung like the arrangement of the brocade religious decorations in the tratsang's assembly hall. We also renovated the brocade decorations. In the beginning, there was only 3 joint, but later they set up the 4 joint and the two joint ngünyer because they couldn't manage to pay the monks salary many times. After being the ngünyer, they also have the right of thön where they could wear the satin vest.   

**Q:**  When you were the umdze how many ngünyer were there in Gomang at one time?   

**A:**  In general there was the 3 joint, 4 joint and the 2 joint. Altogether there were 9.   

**Q:**  How many were there who had finished doing the ngünyer? Was there a term for the ngünyer?   

**Q:**  Their term of office is like 3 years but they can continue if they are capable.   

**Q:**  Yesterday, you said that when your term for umdze you can have 2 gidru and they didn't have to join the tsog right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the shöndre?   

**A:**  No, they don't have to do it.   

**Q:**  If you have only 1 gidru can you give it to someone else.   

**A:**  Yes, even if I have no gidru, I can give the chance to another gegen. They will ask if I have less than 2 gidru, please keep (in name only) my gidru. The gidru will live with the regular gegen. The gegö, umdze, chabu have this special thön for gidru.   

**Q:**  Do the jama and chabril have special thön for the gidru?   

**A:**  No. When a new monk is made, he starts learning from the khatog garmar and if he is a tragyün he starts learning the prayers called dön dönchog [Tib. 'don 'don chog]. First he is taken to the abbot. The abbot then says yes and gives a new name. The abbot writes a letter saying that this person from now on is a monk and puts the labrang's seal on it. This letter is given to the Khamtsen gegen. The next day, the khamtsen gegen comes to the tshog and gives the abbot's letter to the uchö; the umdze and gegö. The umdze takes the letter and fixed his seating.   

**Q:**  What is tragyün? I thought that all the new monks are tragyün.   

**A:**  No. For example, if a tragyün comes from Labrang Tashikhil [Tib. bkra shis 'khyil] they are belonged to Gomang because Jayan sheba was the document lama [Tib. yig cha'i bla ma] of Gomang who fixed all the things like the chöra and they start from dön dönchog Shungwog [Tib. gzhung 'og], Shunggong [Tib. gzhung gong], Kabdang po] [Tib. skabs dang po], Pharchin [Tib. phar phyin], Uma Sarpa [Tib. dbu ma gsar pa], Uma Nyingpa [Tib. dbu ma rnying pa], Dzöpa [Tib. mdzod pa], then Karamwog [Tib. bka' ram 'og], Karamsarpa [Tib. bka' ram gsar pa]. These are the 16 grades. Then after the 16 classes, they just say Karam dangpo, the first, nyiba [Tib. gnyis pa] the second and sumpa [Tib. gsum pa] the third.   

**Q:**  Since the tragyün have started studying pecha from their own monastery, they could start studying from the 7 grade, right?   

**A:**  Yes. As for the new child monks, they have to memorize the prayer books from khatog garmar, khatog gong [Tib. kha dog gong] düdring [Tib. bsdus 'bring] and düchen [Tib. bsdus chen]. These are the düdra which they have to study, if they also plan to do learn tsenyi. After this, the tsenyi students learn the scriptures' lurik yigcha [Tib. yig cha], and tagrik yigcha.   

**Q:**  There are 4 dudra right?   

**A:**  Yes, there are two kinds of dudra; Se [Tib. sras] düdra and Ratö düdra. Gomang only studies Se düdra. If you don't study tsenyi then you have to memorize the prayers recited on the tsog like Gyenjunyi [Tib. rgyan 'jug gnyis], Gomang Chöcho [Tib. sgo mang chos spyod] which is 116 long pages.   

**Q:**  In one grade, dzindra [Tib. 'dzin grwa] some monks were studying tshenyi and some are memorizing the prayers, right?   

**A:**  Since there were the new young monks, until they finish memorizing the düdra, there was nobody studying the tsenyi. And in the chöra, they have to take the exam to the uchö.   

**Q:**  How many chöra are there in one day?   

**A:**  There are three sessions; morning session shogchö [Tib. zhogs chos], traja, afternoon session, gungtsig [Tib. dgung tshig] chöra (other tratsangs call this nyinchö [Tib. nyin chos]. After gungtsig, there is no chöra and then the monks go to receive the teaching from the gegen on pecha, petri [Tib. dpe khrid]. The dobdo however, don't do this, they go off to the gorge near the monastery and play dice. The older lagyüba, they sit around in the courtyard [Tib. ra sgor] and they gossip about everything from dewashung down to mitsen [Tib. mi tshan]. Is this useful talk? They were just meddling into other people's affairs.  Since I was little, I didn't like to interfere in other's business and didn't like people doing that. Anyway, they were only talking about other people's wrongdoings. The pechawa then will go to shag and make a fire and have tea and food. Then in the late afternoon, near the east at Tenmai Simkhang [Tib. bstan ma'i gzim khang] there is a small hill called Dalari [Tib. dgra lha ri] and when it falls under shadow, then they convene the ritual, kurim. [Tib. sku rim].   

**Q:**  If there is tsomja [Tib. tshoms ja] is this served before or after kurim?   

**A:**  It is after gungtsig chöra and before kurim. It is during the teaching period. A few khamtsen and mitsen do this as all day tshog [Tib. nyin 'khyongs] but usually we do this on the session break period. Ganden Ngamjö is on the 25th day, so we stop chöra and have tsog all day. At the morning session, when the monks first enter the chöra we don't sit in the grades and there is no debate, but we sit in long line and they would put one volume of Tanjur text at the end of each line. We have to read this text. [Probably they give each monk a few pages and all read it together] Usually, we read the Tanjur or kangyur first. On the 8th, 15th, and 30th we have to read gyetong [Tib. brgyad stong] text which is also put at the end of the lines. After this, then we have tshog (assemble) and recite the prayers like the Jampel Tshenjö [Tib. 'jam dpal mtshan brjod] and Dugsher Singsum [Tib. gdugs shes seng gsum] and Three Tara, Drölma [Tib. sgrol ma] prayers. Then after these prayers are done, the monks are reorganized into classes and do the debating.   

**Q:**  At this time, were you and gegö in chöra.?   

**A:**  Yes. We have to be there and I start the prayers.   

**Q:**  Do you sit on the thrones in chöra?   

**A:**  No. There are three layers of stages. On this stage I can sit and the stages on top that is for the lamas and on top of that there is a throne which is for the abbot. In general, when they held the chöra, we would have to recite Dukar [Tib. gdugs dkar]. Prayers three times one on the morning session and then on the traja and gungtsig chöra. This prayrer is called Dugsher Sengsum and it is also called Kurim Namsum [Tib. sku rim rnam gsum]. After the morning session, they serve the traja.   

**Q:**  When the monks attended the chöra, they are not allowed to go out, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What were the new ones doing the others were debating?   

**A:**  The new monks just sit in the grade with their cloak, dagam [Tib. zla gam] and hat. They don't do debating. The debate starts from tagrik class. (5th dzindra).   

**Q:**  How many monks come to morning session?   

**A:**  About 100. The karam sarpa [Tib. bka' rams gsar pa] row and karam bug [Tib. bka' rams sbug] row have to come regularly like a tax. It is mostly pechawa and there are a few senior lagyüba. They sit separate from the class in a line and do the prayers, and when the debating starts, they leave. The afternoon session is mostly debate, it has very little prayers. When the monks come in afternoon session they come in pairs of two who will do the debating practice with each other. Then the gegö does a round and then he takes off his hat and then the labgyüpa can go home. As for the nyinchö, when they start the chöra there is a debate and then the karam geshe would become into pairs and take off their cloacks and put them in line. The gegö would put on his cloak and go for a round. And then karam geshe would put on their cloak and kheel down there in pairs. And then the gegö would take off his hat and then one geshe for each pairs would start the debate and ask what you are going to debate and they have to say we are debating this or that. Then the two monks debate between themselves on this topic. After they debate, the monks will assemble together and do prayers and then leave. And then the gegö would go for a round and they would send two geshe from each karam grades to sit there to answer the questions [Tib. dam bca'] and they debate on Uma and Pharchin.   

**Q:**  What is karam gyorpön [Tib. bka' rams skyor dpon]? Is he one person?   

**A:**  He is one person and a very important official in the chöra who have to go through all the grades starting from the dön dönchog one by one. After he finished 16th dzindra, then he would give a donggo for the monks. Karam gyorpön is not easy.   

**Q:**  What is his main duty?   

**A:**  His duty is tsenyi. If one gets the karam gyorpön rank, it is definite that one is the geshe lharamba [Tib. dge shes lha rams pa] though we won't know whether he will be among the ones who get the number. [note: Lharampa's number is from the first place to the seventh place] After one finishes the lharampa then they go to gyü [Tib. rgyud] to debate on tantra [Tib. snags]. First you have to be the gegö and then the lama umdze [Tib. bla ma dbu mdzad] then the abbot, then you would become ex-abbot. After that, if you live long then you would become Sharste Chöje [Tib. shar rtse chos rje] and Changtse chöje [Tib. byang rtse chos rje] in Ganden [Tib. dga' ldan] and ultimately then wait for chance of the Ganden Thripa.   

**Q:**  This is the geshe line of promotions up to Ganden Thripa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, only for the lharampa geshe.   

**Q:**  Does gyorpön means reciting prayers?   

**A:**  Yes he have to recite prayers like kyorchö [Tib. skyor chos] where he had to recite by chanting and he also have to recite the tsibshag [Tib. ?] which is recited on the morning session and the gungtsig chöra.   

**Q:**  Is kurim a ritual [Tib. zhabs brtan]?   

**A:**  Yes. The kurim is the ritual where all the prayers were recited by chanting tone. Mostly the prayer is Drölma.   

**Q:**  What is the content of the tsibshag prayer?   

**A:**  Tsibshag means document [Tib. yig cha]. Each dzindra has a gyorbön, the karam gyorpön is in charge of all the gyorbön.   

**Q:**  Tsibshag means he would check the names of the pecha?   

**A:**  Yes. For example, in the dön dönchog , there are the prayers like Salam [Tib. sa lam] and the drubtha [Tib. grub mtha']. When they recite it they start reciting one page after another from the beginning like saying, "I prostrate to the Manju Shri" [Tib. 'jam dpal dbyangs la phyag 'tshal lo]. First, the abbot says the prayer and then the karam gyorpön has to repeat what the abbot chanted. The rest of the monks are suppose to recite, but they don't and only the karam gyorpön repeat and recite it.   

