# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.14 : Tape 14  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་དགེ, འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee describes the monks' housing within the monastery and issues surrounding the payments to mitsen. He describes the relationship between misten and tragyün. The interviewee discusses the details of the relationship between pupils and teachers within the monastery, including the length of the relationship and types of financial support provided to the students. Also discussed are issues of admissions of monks to khamtsen and the tonggo conducted to achieve rank. He describes in detail the cashier's capital, the grain steward's rights, responsibilities and the selection and power of the stewards.   

---  
### Tape 14  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_14/M_0001_14.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Did the Hor Mitsen have one house or many houses?   

**A:**  It had one house.   

**Q:**  Most of the mitsen had one house?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Some of the khamtsen had several houses?   

**A:**  Khamtsen had several houses. For the Hor Mitsen, they had only one house which was very good. Nowadays they are rebuilding it again.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there?   

**A:**  At that time, there were 500-600 monks.   

**Q:**  You mean to say 500 monks?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that at the time of revolt?   

**A:**  Yes, it had more than 500 monks.   

**Q:**  In a year, only 3 monks from Central Tibet, böshug, [Tib. བོད་ཞུགས] were allowed to join the Hor Mitsen, right? As for the monks from the north, Hor, they could join the mitsen no matter how many monks from Hor were in the tragyün, right?   

**A:**  In a year there were 5 monks from Central Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did the monks from the Central Tibet have to pay money to the mitsen?   

**A:**  They had to pay money.   

**Q:**  How much money did they have to pay?   

**A:**  When we joined, we paid 25 sang, then it went up to 75 and then it went up to 10 dotse.   

**Q:**  Was that just before the revolt?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You had pay this to the mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to pay the mitsen.   

**Q:**  When you joined the mitsen, did you have to serve tea which was called the admission tea, sarja, [Tib. གསར་ཇ]?   

**A:**  They would serve the sarja at the time when tonggo called Nyerpa Düsang [Tib. གཉེར་པའ་"དུ་བཟང]. They would serve only one tea.   

**Q:**  One tea means 4 times of tea?   

**A:**  No, it was only once.   

**Q:**  Did they serve thukpa?   

**A:**  No, they would not.   

**Q:**  What did it mean by Nyerpa Düsang?   

**A:**  The term for nyerpa was one year and when they finished their term for one year, the two nyerpa would supply 4 days Düsang. The nyerpa was very hard.   

**Q:**  Did the tragyün have to serve admission tea, Sarja?   

**A:**  No, they didn't need to serve.   

**Q:**  Tragyün were obliged to work for the shöndre?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the böpa have to work as the shöndre?   

**A:**  They had to do the grain nyerpa, drunyer, [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར]. That was the only thing they had to do. There was not much grain in the mitsen.   

**Q:**  Last time, you were talking about how some of tragyün knew their gegen in the mitsen, right?   

**A:**  When the tragyün would come, if they had relatives or if there were some monks who came from the same village, then they would make them become a monk. If you didn't have any one in the mitsen who knew you, but if you belonged to that mitsen, all the members of the meeting would write their names on a piece of paper and roll it into a cigarette shape and put them in a cardboard box. They would hand it over to the nyerpa helper, nyeryog, [Tib. གཉེར་གཡོག] and leave it in the box in the assembly hall. When the tragyün would come, the nyerpa helper would ask him where he came from and he would say that he came from this or that place. Then he would let the tragyün pick up a rolled paper from the box.   

**Q:**  In the box, there were all the names of the monks who were in the tsondu?   

**A:**  In the box, there were all the names of the members of the tsondu. When the tragyün picked the name from the box, that would be his gegen. The nyerpa helper would take him to his gegen and introduce him and tell the gegen that you have been selected as his gegen from lottery system. In my shag, my gegen got one tragyün from lottery system because he was from the north. He is now in the People's Hospital.   

**Q:**  What did you call your gegen?   

**A:**  I called him the monastic seat gegen, Trasai gegen, [Tib. གྲྭ་སའི་དགེ་རྒན].   

**Q:**  Trasai Gegan and the gegen who gave food, toter gegen, [Tib. ལྟོ་སྟེར་དགེ་རྒན] were the same?   

**A:**  Yes, these were the same. If the pupil listened to his gegen well, then the gegen may keep him as his pupil forever. If the pupil didn't behave well, then the gegen would find a guarantor, [Tib. ཁས་འཁྱག] gegen for him and the pupil would stay separately. In the future, if the pupil got into trouble and need to approach the monastic officials, the gegen himself didn't need to take the responsibility and the guarantor gegen had to bear the responsibility.   

**Q:**  Your gegen got a pupil from the lottery, so did the pupil stay with your gegen or separately?   

**A:**  The pupil stayed together.   

**Q:**  Was that a law that the pupil should stay with his gegen?   

**A:**  Actually, when you got a pupil from the lottery, you have to keep him with you. When the pupil got older and if he was able to study tsenyi, then he didn't need to do the nyerpa of Hor Mitsen. If he was not able to study tsenyi, then he had to do the nyerpa. If you did the nyerpa, there was a little capital like 100-200 dotse. From that money he had to give the tonggo for 4 days Nyerpa Düsang.   

**Q:**  Were there any kind of fixed times, like one or two years, for the gegen to keep his pupil and give him his livelihood?   

**A:**  There was a system like that. Some of the gegens would keep the pupil for 2-3 years and after that the gegen would put the pupil separately.   

**Q:**  When the gegen first kept the tragyün, were there any fixed times like the gegen would keep his pupil for 2-3 years?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't. Actually, when the gegen got a pupil from the lottery system, the gegen had to keep him forever, even if he was a beggar. If he would keep the pupil and if the gegen would treat him well, then the pupil would work for all of his shöndre.   

**Q:**  Some other tragyün who were not from Hor Mitsen and they came, but they didn't know other people. So they used many ways to find the gegen like selecting bootstraps. Most of the tragyün would say, "I have a gegen, but that was just a gegen in name and I didn't stay with the gegen and I stayed separately and they were not sharing livelihood." Was there anything like this in the Hor mitsen?   

**A:**  Some of them were like that in the Hor Mitsen. I think this was like a karmic relation from the previous life between the gegen and pupil. Some of them would keep their pupil forever and some of them would just teach the things and set him off in separate apartment just like a guarantor gegen. But according to the rules if you get a pupil from lottery you had to keep him.   

**Q:**  If a gegen got a pupil from the lottery, but the gegen didn't want to keep him. What was the shortest time the gegen would keep him? Would they keep him just for 3-4 days and leave him separately?   

**A:**  The shortest time would be that the gegen would find him a shag and leave him there and during few days, the gegen would just see how he was doing and then leave him there.   

**Q:**  What if the pupil didn't have tsamba, did the gegen have to give him tsamba?   

**A:**  He had to find his own way to find tsamba. There were not many situation like this in the Hor Mitsen. The mitsen was very upright. Few gegen would leave the pupil separate, but it was a very few. Among the 9 mitsen, Hor Mitsen was the best in Hamdong. We had the best pechawa and the monks called dönsang, [Tib. འདོན་བཟང] who were skilled in chanting prayers with long tones [Tib. འདོན་རྟ་དབྱང] on the assembly like the good dönsang in the tratsang. In the mitsen, the monks were good in tsenyi because the monks who study tsenyi were treated as special and they didn't need to be the nyerpa. Hor Mitsen belonged to Talungdra and at the time of Taktra Regency, he built one more story on the mitsen's house. Later, they destroyed it. These days, some people were getting donations in this year and they were trying to build the assembly hall [Tib. ཚོམ].   

**Q:**  When you got the pupil from the lottery system, did the parents help you by giving food?   

**A:**  The most of the lottery pupils didn't have parents to come to see them.   

**Q:**  You mean to say for the tragyün?   

**A:**  Among the tragyün, some of them have relatives and their condition was quite good. The lottery [Tib. ཤོག་རྒྱན] pupils don't have any one like relatives and they were like beggars.   

**Q:**  What dose it mean by Shogyen [Tib. ཤོག་རྒྱན]?   

**A:**  Shokgyen means lottery. Now my pupil is working in the People's Hospital. He came to see me. When he was my pupil, his mother was begging in Gyanbumgang [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Your pupil was from the nomads?   

**A:**  Yes, he came to our shag as a lottery pupil and we kept him until the revolt took place. Since the revolt began he lived separated. Therefore, he came to see me and he would bring rice and flour for me and I gave him tsamba. He told me, "he was grateful to me." There were not that many lottery pupils. The lottery pupils were beggars.   

**Q:**  The monks who come from Damshung, [Tib. འདམ་གཞུང] belonged [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུང] to Hor Mitsen. Were there any misten for the böpa?   

**A:**  No, the böpa didn't have mitsen to belonged to.   

**Q:**  The böpa didn't have a khamtsen or mitsen, right?   

**A:**  There was Chubsang, [Tib. ཆུ་བཟང] Khamtsen, actually that khamtsen belonged to Amdo but there was no monk from Amdo and all the monks were böpa.   

**Q:**  The monks from Chubsang would be admitted in that khamtsen, but if the monks were from the lower part of Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང ] did they get admitted to the Chubsang Khamtsen ?   

**A:**  Yes, they would get admitted.   

**Q:**  What if the monks came from Phempo [Tib. འཕན་པོ] would they get admitted in there?   

**A:**  No, the monks from Phenpo belonged to Gerpa [Tib. སྒེར྄་པ] Khamtsen in Loseling where all the monks were from Phempo. Loseling also had the mitsen called Dingkha, [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁ྄] mitsen.   

**Q:**  Was there any way for the böpa tragyün who were like beggars to get admitted?   

**A:**  There were not many böpa tragyün like beggars because they would find some relatives and friends and get admitted.   

**Q:**  What kind of tonggo should they supply in order to get the rank called mitsen chönze? Did they have to serve one tea for the khamtsen, tsomja [Tib. ཚོམ་ཇ]?   

**A:**  I don't know about the mitsen chönze.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Tsokhag, [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ] Misten had chöndze?   

**A:**  I was in Tsokhag, but I don't know.   

**Q:**  Hor Mitsen didn't have the mitsen chöndze, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about in the khamtsen? Did they have chöndze?   

**A:**  The khamtsen didn't have chöndze. If you were a chöndze in tratsang then you would be the chöndze of misten also and you didn't need to work as a nyerpa. Once you became a chöndze, then you would become the sponsor of the nyerpa. There were two nyerpa during one year. The monks who were supplying the tonggo for the Geshe exam and the monks who were supplying the tonggo for the chöndze would become the sponsors of the two nyerpa and they would serve 4 thukpa and 4 teas on the midday [Tib. གུང་ཚིག] tsog at the time of Nyerpa Düsang.   

**Q:**  Did you supply the tonggo for the chöndze?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  In the mitsen, there were the monastic official; [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] two nyerpa and was it one or two chandzö?   

**A:**  Probably, there was no chandzö and there were many cashiers, ngünyer, [Tib. དངུལ་གཉེར] because there were many tsomja served in the khamtsen .   

**Q:**  You are now talking about Hor Mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes, you had to do the cashier even though you were studying tsenyi.   

**Q:**  Did the böpa need to be the cashier?   

**A:**  No, they didn't need to do the cashier. For the cashier there were three and two joint cashiers. There were many teas served in the khamtsen like; three days in 9th month, the commemorating the Buddha coming back to the world, Lhabab Düchen [Tib. ལྷ་འབབ་དུས་ཆེན] and two days on the Ganden Ngamjö, 2 days in Losar, [Tib. ལོ་གསར] the Tibetan New year, 2 days in the 4th month, the month of commemorating the Birth, Enlightenment and Parinirvana of the Buddha, Sakadawa [Tib. ས་ག་ཟླ་བ]. These tonggo were all done by the two cashiers. They would keep the capital and the interest was used for the tonggo.   

**Q:**  The cashiers were all from the tragyün which belonged to the mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes, the monks who were in the tsondu would be able to become cashiers for the term of probably 3 years. Each and every cashiers would give the tonggo better than the previous year. So the mitsen would be developed.   

**Q:**  Did you do the cashier?   

**A:**  I didn't have to do the cashier because I was böpa.   

**Q:**  So how about your gegen? Did he do the cashier?   

**A:**  Yes, he did the cashier because he belonged to Hor.   

**Q:**  How did they select the cashier in the tsondu?   

**A:**  The cashier would go by turn.   

**Q:**  As you remember the cashier's term was 3 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How much capital did you have?   

**A:**  There were not many capital. The capital was set up in early times and it was a small amount and later the population of the monk became very high. In the mitsen, there were 500 monks which was a very high number of monks. They would give the tonggo very nicely. Each dönsangnga had to give the tonggo for 5 sessions of assembly. In the morning there was a thukpa and 3 teas. In 1 sessions, there were 2 teas and at lunch, there were 4 thukpa and 4 teas. In the evening, there were 2 teas. In the late evening there were 2 teas and the assembly would hold until 1-2 a.m.   

**Q:**  Was that the tonggo for their graduation or what?   

**A:**  That was the yearly tonggo given by turn.   

**Q:**  Did they have to find the supply for the tsomja?   

**A:**  The tonggo for the tsomja was supplied by the cashier.   

**Q:**  There was no tsomja on regular base, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the tsomja would be supplied only on the religious festivals like Sakadawa. There were two days tonggo on Sakadawa. And there were 7 session assembly. On the 4th of the 6th month, commemorating the Buddha giving the teaching on the four noble truths, [Tib. དྲུག་པ་ཚེས་བཞི] there were 2 days tonggo. Two days on Lhabab Düchen and two days tonggo on Ganden Ngamjö, two days tonggo for the New Year, the Losar. Then on the 2nd to the 5th of the 10th month there were the rituals for the Tara, Drölma Düsang [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མའ་འདུ་བཟང] which would be sponsored by the Taktra Labrang. After finishing these, they would stop for one day and then there were 4 days tonggo for Nyerpa Düsang and the nyerpa would be changed.   

**Q:**  After they finished tonggo on the Nyerpa Düsang, they would change the nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, the nyerpa would be very busy and the monks would speak northern dialect and ridicule the nyerpa saying, "I don't have time because it is the Nyerpa Düsang." [Tib. lcog shi me gda' khom shi mi gda' gnyer pa dü bzang red].   

**Q:**  There were two nyerpa, so did they share the capital or they would have a separate capital?   

**A:**  If they get along well, then they would share the capital. If not, they would separate the capital and each nyerpa will give the tonggo for two days. In the past, they would order the yogurt from chang and serve rice and the yogurt, [Tib. ཞོ་འབྲས] on the tsog during the Nyerpa Düsang. If there were sponsors for nyerpa then they would invite the sponsor and give the party and they would use meat. On the Nyerpa Düsang during the 4 days they would serve thugap thashi, [Tib. ཐུག་པ་ཐ་ཞི], which is chopped meat in rice noodle mixed together. In the past, they use to serve boiled meat and later the rule was changed to give each monk seven and half karma, chegye [Tib. ཕེད་བརྒྱད] as the replacement of the meat and stopped serving meat.   

**Q:**  In the tratsang, there was the jama [Tib. ཇ་མ] and the jayok [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] for making the tea in khamtsen. In the mitsen who would do these things?   

**A:**  In the mitsen, there was no jama, but the cashier would do it.   

**Q:**  Usually, the cashier should serve tsomja?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many tsomja were there in a year except the Religious Festival?   

**A:**  Usually there was no tsomja except on Religious Festival?   

**Q:**  Would the nyerpa tsomja and the cashier tsomja serve at the same time?   

**A:**  The cashier would serve the tsomja on the religious festival like Lhabab Düchen. The nyerpa will serve it on the 12th-15th of the 10th month. Usually, the cashier would serve the tsomja.   

**Q:**  The cashier should find the people for making the tea and making fire?   

**A:**  Yes, they would organize and hire monks.   

**Q:**  Did they need to pay for them?   

**A:**  I am sure they might have.   

**Q:**  All the cashiers had worked as the nyerpa before that, right?   

**A:**  No, when they were doing the cashier they hadn't done the nyerpa.   

**Q:**  The Pechawa had to do the cashier?   

**A:**  Yes, but they didn't need to be the nyerpa.   

**Q:**  The Pechawa didn't have do the nyerpa?   

**A:**  They didn't have to do the nyerpa. When they reached their turn then they would join in the tsondu and the next monk would do the nyerpa.   

**Q:**  All the monks should do the cashier?   

**A:**  Yes, all the monks should do the cashier.   

**Q:**  Did the böpa have to do the cashier?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  The monks who were not Pechawa should do the nyerpa and the monks who were Pechawa didn't need to do the nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right.   

**Q:**  After you did the nyerpa then you would join the tsondu, after that you would reach your turn for the chandzö?   

**A:**  For the Hor mitsen I don't think there was chandzö.   

**Q:**  In the Hor Misten, they had a herd of animals and the nomads. So who would do these works?   

**A:**  I don't think there were many nomads. I didn't hear about having that much nomads. The cashiers were working hard with loyalty they thought that the capital was not enough, but they would give the tonggo. I am not sure about this, but probably they didn't have much meat and butter to collect.   

**Q:**  In Tsokag mitsen, they had two chandzö so we might have misunderstood that Hor Mitsen also had two chandzö. In Hor mitsen did they have grain nyerpa, drunyer, [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར]?   

**A:**  Yes, we had a grain nyerpa.   

**Q:**  Were there any fixed term that they had to work as grain nyerpa?   

**A:**  Probably, they have to do the grain nyerpa for a three years terms. And the grain nyerpa should be done by only the böpa. They would have to do the grain nyerpa no matter they were chöndze or a monk who had been shengo. The turn of grain nyerpa would be by according to the seniority.   

**Q:**  For one turn, how many grain nyerpa were there?   

**A:**  There were two, probably, there was not much grain. The grain storage was in Nangtse Dragü [Tib. སྣང་རྩེ་བྲག་ཁུད] in Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང].   

**Q:**  The grain nyerpa would take turns, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I think the grain nyerpa had to supply the tsamba for making tshog offering, [Tib. ཚོགས] on Ganden Ngamjö. They had to roast the barley and grind the tsamba.   

**Q:**  Did you reach the turn to do the grain nyerpa?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  If you reach your turn, you had to do the grain nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes, I had to do it.   

**Q:**  Was it okay to put some one for the replacement of your turn [Tib. ཚབ]?   

**A:**  I would not be able to go, but I would have to sent some one from my shag.   

**Q:**  In the Hor Mitsen, were there other monastic officials?   

**A:**  No, there were no other officials, but there were the tsondu members dealing with politics.   

**Q:**  There weren't any like clerks, right?   

**A:**  Yes, The nyerpa would look after the discipline in assembly. In the assembly the nyerpa would go around in assembly and if he saw some young monks talking, then he would beat them up.   

**Q:**  Did the nyerpa have the power to whip the monks?   

**A:**  Yes, he had the power.   

**Q:**  Did the nyerpa have the power to expel the monks from the mitsen?   

**A:**  No, only the tsondu had the expelling power. If there was some one need to be expelled, then the nyerpa would report to the tsondu and the members would decide the matter.   

**Q:**  For example, if there were 100 monks in the tsondu, were there anybody who had more power like the senior, [Tib. ཁྲི་པ]?   

**A:**  The monks who sit at the head of the tsondu were the seniors and they had the power. In general, if some one who was capable and thinking for the common good and acting powerful in the tsondu, then nobody would dare to say anything. The members of khamtsen tsondu and the tratsang chöndze would sit at the head of the rows. If they were capable and said that we have to do this and that every body will say, "yes, you are right."   

**Q:**  The tsondu would be held three times in a year or the tsondu would be held sometimes?   

**A:**  Whenever there were any issue, then they would hold the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Were there any fixed time for holding tsondu?   

**A:**  No, there was no fix time.   

**Q:**  Would it be possible that sometimes, they didn't hold tsondu in a year?   

**A:**  No, it is impossible. Every matter would be decided by the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me something about the matter decided in the tsondu as an example?   

**A:**  For example, if two monks got into fight, this would be a matter. The nyerpa couldn't settle the matter, he had to report to the tsondu. And the tsondu would decide the matter. They didn't call the monks in the tsondu and the nyerpa would carry out the punishment etc.   

**Q:**  What kind of other matters were there outside of fighting?   

**A:**  Otherwise, we didn't have many matters. If some one have shiga and nomads then there would many matters, but we didn't have that.   

**Q:**  The grain nyerpa had to give the loans?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard the nyerpa had to serve cookies [Tib. ཁ་ཟས] for the Losar?   

**A:**  This system was not in past. Later, they were serving 4 cookies and after that it became 8, and they have to make the cookies. For that, the mitsen wouldn't push them to do it. The grain nyerpa supplied cookies out of their capability. If one capable nyerpa made good cookies then it became like a custom and the others also had to make it.   

**Q:**  According to the tradition, the grain nyerpa would have to supply the tsamba for making tsog offering at the time of Ngamjö?   

**A:**  Yes, the nyerpa had to give 5 khe of tsamba.   

**Q:**  The 5 khe of tsamba should be supplied for each monk?   

**A:**  No, altogether we had to give 5 khe for one year to make the tsog offering. Later, when the grain nyerpa were capable, they supplied cookies for the monks. So the next grain nyerpa also had to serve cookies and this became a system.   

**Q:**  In the Hor mitsen, did you have grain salary [Tib. འབྲུ་ཕོགས]?   

**A:**  No, there was no grain salary. If the tratsang and khamtsen want to pay the grain salary they could pay the salary, because they had a lot of grain. But the monks who were in charge were not so capable. So we didn't have the salary.   

**Q:**  Was there lot of grain?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a lot of grain.   

**Q:**  The candidates of the khamtsen nyerpa would come from the mitsen by turn, right? How did the turn reach?   

**A:**  The nyerpa of Hamdong Khamtsen would take turn by two mitsen in rotation. The nyerpa didn't have that much responsibility.   

**Q:**  You mean to say the nyerpa didn't have the responsibility of the khamtsen ?   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't have the power to bring monks in the tsondu. After finishing the nyerpa, they had to be the khamtsen gegen . The nyerpa didn't have to deal with the monks. The nyerpa had to give the tonggo for the members of tsondu at the time of bathing picnic [Tib. ཆབ་ཞུགས] which is in [8th month of 1st day] and one day in Losar the New Year. After that, he would become the khamtsen gegen for a year and then he would join the tsondu.   

**Q:**  How many years did you have to be the nyerpa?   

**A:**  That was for one year term.   

**Q:**  The candidates of nyerpa would come from the mitsen?   

**A:**  They would come from two misten.   

**Q:**  Was it two nyerpa?   

**A:**  Two nyerpa would not come from one mitsen; one nyerpa would come from each mitsen.   

**Q:**  What were the mitsen where the nyerpa would go?   

**A:**  Hor Mitsen, Tsokag Mitsen and Washu Mitsen who had three parts. So actually it was like five mitsen. In general, in the tsondu of Hamdong Khamtsen, there were two rows; [Tib. གྲལ] the Khampa row and the Mongolian row. I don't know clearly about the two rows.   

**Q:**  For example, in this year if they had to select a nyerpa for the Hamdong Khamtsen, how would they select it from the Hor Mitsen?   

**A:**  The tsondu would select it from the mitsen.   

**Q:**  The name will be selected by the members of the tsondu?   

**A:**  Yes. There were a lot of monks who wanted to do the nyerpa and it was kind of squashed together [Tib. འཚང་ག].   

**Q:**  If some one was going to be the khamtsen nyerpa, would they send him from among the members of the tsondu?   

**A:**  The nyerpa of the khamtsen would be the monks in the tsondu who had finished the nyerpa in Hor Mitsen.   

**Q:**  How did they select the nyerpa? Did they select the nyerpa from among the members of tsondu or the members would select some one else?   

**A:**  They would select the nyerpa from among the members of the tsondu.   

**Q:**  So there were many monks want to be the nyerpa so how did they select them? Did they vote?   

**A:**  Probably, the nyerpa were selected according to the seniority. After finishing nyerpa, he had to do the khamtsen gegen. When you became the khamtsen gegen, then you became the member of the tsondu of khamtsen. It won't be good for a new monk to become the nyerpa. Therefore, it was according to the seniority.   

**Q:**  Once you were selected as the nyerpa of the khamsten, then you will become the khamtsen gegen automatically?   

**A:**  Yes, once you finished working as a nyerpa, then you would become the khamtsen gegen and after that you will become the member of Hamdong khamtsen tsondu. But, you were not allowed to speak out in the tsondu for a couple of years unless you finished being the chandzö of the khamtsen. Then you can speak out in the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, did the Hor Mitsen select the nyerpa by doing senriy at the front of the deity?   

**A:**  No, they didn't do that.   

**Q:**  You were a böpa and you had to pay the money to the mitsen. Did you have to do something to the khamtsen in addition to that?   

**A:**  No, I had been admitted in the khamtsen before that. I didn't join the mitsen till it had been 8-9 years since I became a monk. You don't need to have a mitsen right away and it is okay not to have mitsen, but you have to have a khamtsen from the beginning.   

**Q:**  Please tell me this again. I don't understand?   

**A:**  When you become a monk, you need to have a khamtsen right away. It was okay not to have a mitsen.   

**Q:**  As you said for the böpa, when they join the monastery, you had to pay 25 sang and later it went up to 50 sang, right?   

**A:**  First you had to stay 8-9 years in the khamtsen, then you should find a mitsen and you had to pay 25 sang.   

**Q:**  So when you first joined the khamtsen, what did you have to do?   

**A:**  No, you don't have to do anything except you will be listed in the name list. When I joined the misten I had to pay 25 sang. My gegen was a member of the tsondu and if I didn't join in that year then after that I would be unable to join the mitsen because it went up to 75 sang. When I joined the mitsen, I was 16 years old and I was quite good in praying.   

**Q:**  There were two chandzö in the Hamdong Khamtsen. Were they böpa or from the place they belonged to, thobkung [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས]?   

**A:**  After you finished doing the khamtsen gegen, you will become the member of the tsondu, but you don't have the right to speak up. There were quite a lot of monks like this and among these, they will reach the turn for the chandzö and after you worked as a chandzö, then you have the right to speak up in the tsondu.   

**Q:**  For the chandzö, would they take turn?   

**A:**  It would go by seniority   

**Q:**  What about the tea maker, jama?   

**A:**  The jama was not taking by turn. And you should ask the tsondu to give you the position of the jama. In general, It was said that the jama of Hamdong was the representative of the böpa. The jama could be done by only böpa. In general, the Jama was known to be like the representatives of the böpa and only the were allowed to do that.   

**Q:**  He would act like ear of the böpa and he would listen in the tsondu and he would inform the böpa like a spy, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [laughter]>   

**Q:**  Probably, the grain nyerpa in the khamtsen was böpa, right?   

**A:**  I don't think there was a grain nyerpa in the khamtsen. The members of the tsondu would do that work. The khamtsen had two shiga; Kyormolung Jarag [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང་སྦྱར་རག] Shiga and Gyalkhar [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར] Shiga. These were dealt by the tsondu.   

**Q:**  As for the shidü, did they take turn or they would go by capability?   

**A:**  Yes, it would go by capability. At some point, they leased the shiga. After that khamtsen ran the shiga.   

**Q:**  Under the Hamdong, there were 29 common house. jikhang, [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང]   

**A:**  That's right.   

**Q:**  There was a position called something like Shala, [Tib. ?]. What did they call for the leader of Jikhang [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང]?   

**A:**  There were no leaders in the Jikhang and everything would be dealt with by the tsondu. There was Genyen [Tib. དགེ་བསྙེན] and Nordzin Jama [Tib. ནོར་འཛིན་ཇ་མ] and nangsen [Tib. ནང་ཟན] these didn't have any special meaning. The Nondzin Jama and Nangsen were the servants serving in the tsondu. They had to make the fire for tea and make tea. They were the persons who were allowed to go in the tsondu to serve the tea. The other monks were not allowed to go in the tsondu. If some one came with a case to the tsondu, they have come to the door of the tsondu hall and the chandzö will come out and you have tell him about your case. The chandzö will report it to the tsondu. This was like a system of the Tibetan Government in the Kashag. There was the Genyen who had to cut the meat in a special way for the assembly. These were like servants.   

**Q:**  Would the candidates of the Hamdong Khamtsen gegen come from six mitsen? That was like taking turn, right? For example, in a year, the first turn would reach Jurchö [Tib. འཇུར་ཆོས] mitsen, right?   

**A:**  Oh yes, the first would be the Jurchö.   

**Q:**  First would be the Jurchö and Hor, then tsempo [Tib. བཙན་པ྄ོ] and thorgö [Tib. ཐོར་རྒོད] then tsokag and Gunglung [Tib. གུང་ལུང]] or Jangya, [Tib. ལྕང་རྒྱ] right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Jurchö would come again because they were Mongolian's mitsen and they had more right. Jurchö, Tshokhag and Thorgö were Mongolian and they would reach the term for every three years, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Khampas were in the mitsen like Hor, Tsempo and Gunglung and Washu?   

**A:**  Yes, they were less than others.   

**Q:**  Therefore, the Hor mitsen could sent only one candidate once in 6 years, is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, it might be.   

**Q:**  So, did they select them as a name of the nyerpa or the khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  They would select it as a name of the nyerpa. After you became the nyerpa, then you will become the khamtsen gegen.   

