# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.10 : Tape 10  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gendün Nyima was a Tibetan monk. In this interview, he talks about becoming an undze and also about other various positions that one could hold and how the positions were achieved. Additionally, he discusses how long certain leadership terms were and the appointment of shengo, including possible partners and where the nominees came from.   

---  
### Tape 10  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_10/M_0001_10.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I and my teacher's plan was that when I finished lurik exam I should go to Lhasa and there my maternal ant's relative is (a thanka painter] whose husband Loya [Tib. ལོ་ཡག] was very skilled thanka painter. I would study thanka painting with him. This was before we merged shagtsang. But since I was appointed lurik umdze, that was impossible because I was now in the ketrelpa [Tib. སྐད་གྲལ་པ], the ones who have good voice and had to memorize all the prayers of the tratsang that was recitd on the assembly, so had no time to study artist. There are not many prayers to learn for Gomang. Gomang's chöjö has, 160 pages. Then there is also Gyenjugnyi [Tib. རྒྱན་འཇུག་གཉིས] which is Ngöntogyen [Tib. མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན] and Uma Jugpa [Tib. དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པ] and the Dugsher Sengsum [Tib. གདུགས་ཤེས་སེང་གསུམ] and Drölma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ]. There are various different tone [Tib.དབྱངས] in the Gomang chöjö. And you have to learn this tone and find a teacher to teach you. Then you have to learn the prayers associated with Uma and Parchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན]. And you do Parchin's dönsang. After I did Parchin dönsang, I became Pharchin umdze. There is a Parchin linga [Tib. གླིང་ག] in the 5th month for one day. There is another one at Ngamjö time for one day and at the day commemorating the Buddha coming back to the earth, Lhabab Düchen [Tib. ལྷ་བབ་དུས་ཆེན] for one day. Then there is Trumtha [Tib. གྲུབ་མཐའ] for three days, Jubshi [Tib. བཅུ་བཞི] for one day. At these times, I acted as pharchin umdze. The umdze himself has to do these, he can't hire someone else to do them. After you have done Pharchin umdze, then you do Parchin Thamcha [Tib. phar phyn dam bca'] If you aren't a pechwa you hire a geshe to do this. Then after you have done Pharchin umdze, you can only go up to tratsang umdze. It is the stepping stone to tratsang umdze. These were all done accordig to the thought of Jayan Shepa who was the owner of the document of the Gomang. In 1950 when the Dalai Lama went to Yadong the Gomang Tratsang umdze was appointed tshochen umdze by Sitsab Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] of the dewashung. In the winter of that year, he was appointed the Gomang tratsang umdze. Then I did the umdze for 9 years.   

**Q:**  How many ketrelpa were there in the Gomang at that time?   

**A:**  There were about 100 of them.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  There were two ways of becoming dönsangnga. The other ones were sellect the better ones by the umdze and gegö in the tsog and put him into the group specially. In the beginninjg, there were about 50-60 but later it was increased. When a sponsors request for tsog and alms in Gomang, they always asked for a donation called Yangchag [Tib.དབྱངས་ཕྱག་ཞལ་འདེབས]. If the umdze is good and when we also have a good endowment, then we sometimes are able to hold the Yangchag for 7 days and give alms to the monks. And we sit in front row, [Tib. གདོང་གྲལ]. At the head of the tshogs' in front row is the trüku of the regents, gyetrü [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྤྲུལ] then the trüku of the Ganden Tripa, tritrü, [Tib. ཁྲི་སྤྲུལ] then tsogchen trüku, then the trüku of the tratsang, khentrü, [Tib. མཁན་སྤྲུལ] then we, the umdze woud sit.   

**Q:**  Next to you were the enchöndze, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was when we were incumbent. Then the ketrelpa would sit and the monks sit in order of seniority.   

**Q:**  Do the senior most monk [Tib. མཚན་ཐོ་དང་པོ] sit in the front row?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Who would make the decision whether he is a ketrelpa?   

**A:**  The gegö would make the decision and make them sit in the front row.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  When you become a ketrelpa, do you have the right of thön, [Tib. ཐོན]?   

**A:**  No. When you finish the umdze then you have the thön and ketrelpa was the only way to become a umdze.   

**Q:**  Phodrang Depa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] Parkhang Depa [Tib. པར་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] Chökhang Depa [Tib. མཆོད་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] these are all appointed by government?   

**A:**  Yes. There are 2 chökhang. One is from east Gomang, the others one is from (west) the Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] Tratsang. This is a rule. One Parkhang Depa is Gomang, and the other is Loseling; the Phodrang Depa is only from Gomang. Then there is a tsomchen depa [Tib.ཚོམས་ཆེན་སྡེ་པ] and simchung depa [Tib.གཟིམ་ཆུང་སྡེ་པ]. These are from Loseling.   

**Q:**  With the Phodrang Depa, would they select them from the all the khamtsen within Gomang?   

**A:**  It goes by rotation within the tratsang 's khamtsen. So if the Phodrang Depa has to be changed and if you become a Phodrang Depa, you have to join the khamtsen whose turn it is and work for them like renovating the houses. For example, the Phodrang Depa before the revolt was from Shungba [Tib. གཞུང་པ] Khamtsen. So he was not originally from shungba khamtsen, so it was impossible for him to get this jod because he was the jiso Lhawang [Tib. ལྷ་དབང], Ling's shagtsang's gidru. He applied to become a Shungba Khamtsen's member and for Shungba Khamtsen he did a lot of work like repairing the Shungpa Khantsen jikhang. So Shungba Khamtsen appointed him as their turn for becoming the Phodrang Deba.   

**Q:**  What is the term of the Phodrang Deba.   

**A:**  It was 6 years. Jiso is 10 years. You need a person who is capable to be Phodrang Depa . The candidate from the khamtsen has to have done a lot of work for the khamtsen such as repairing buildings etc. So when a khamtsen's turn comes, if they don't have a good person already, they don't lose their turn. They put in someone like the above case. That is seen to be okay since it benefits the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  When you want to join the khamtsen to become a Phodrang Depa, first he had to give a tsomja, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And then he also renovated the house of the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  This is like a bribe?   

**A:**  No its more like an endowment,jog, [Tib. འཇོགས]. When such a person wanting to be Phodrang Depa thinks of joining shungba, first he has a discussion with officials. If I want to join your khamtsen to get Phodrang Depa . I'll do this and this for our khamtsen. So in the above case he repaired the jikhang well and probably did other things as well.   

**Q:**  How does the shengo appointment work?   

**A:**  In the early times, there used to be 7 tratsang in Drepung; upon the 4 present tratsang, there were Düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ], Shagor [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར] and Gyepa, [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] and it rotates between the different tratsang putting up two names every year. Gomang gets a shengo for two years in a row, then has a one year rest. Loseling gets 3 years in a row then one year off. Loseling has under its 3 turns because it has two of the vacant tratsang; gyepa and Shagor. Gomang has under its control 1 of the vacant tratsang Düwa Tratsang. Gamang gets 20 shengo. Then Ngagpa and Deyang each get one.   

**Q:**  How do they do within the Gomang?   

**A:**  Within Gomang, the nominee comes from Böbashung mitsen. So it does for two years. Then after a year gap, the shengo from Gomang comes from Düwa--this comes from Gadong mitsen. Gadong mitsen's partner would be Loseling. Gomang Böbashung's would be Loseling Deyang's partner would be Gyepa (Loseling) and would be regarded as a harsh, [Tib. རྩུབ་པ] shengo. Gadong Mitsen's partner would be Ngagpa Trstang or sometimes it happens that: Böbashung's partner also would be Ngagba at one rotation. And the Ngagpa's partner also would be Böbashung. But Gyeba and Deyang are always partners. For EXAMPLE: Year 1. Gomang böbashung + Losleing böbashung Year 2. Gomang böbashung + Loseling Gomang böbashung. Year 3. Deyang + Loseling Gyepa. Year 4. Gadong Mitsen + Ngagpa.   

**Q:**  Shagor is missing.   

**Q:**  Loseling could have three shengo cadidates; the tratsang abbot, Shagor abbot and Gyepa abbot.   

**Q:**  Who was the parner of Shagor?   

**A:**  Shagor belonged to Loseling There turn comes from Nyaling Tsosum [Tib. ཉ་གླིང་མཚོ་གསུམ]; [Tib. མྱང་མགོ།གླིང།མཚོ་སྨད] These are khamtsen from Loseling.   

**Q:**  Who is the partner of the Nyaling Tsosum?   

**A:**  It is Gomang Böbashung.   

**Q:**  So Gomang Böbashung does the shengo for two years, right?   

**A:**  Yes and Loseling would do three years. And Ngagpa does for one year and Deyang does for ome year.   

**Q:**  Where does the nominee from Gyepa come from?   

**A:**  In Loseling probably it comes from böbashung.   

**Q:**  The candidates of Gomang itself comes from böbashung. Gandong Mitsen is belobed to Düwa, right?   

**A:**  Yes when they count 7 tratsang. When put forward the cadidates of the shengo, an abbot would come who was called election abbot [Tib. འོས་བསྡུ་མཁན་པོ]. And Deyang and the Gyepa abbots go as partners. If it is two böbashung, the abbots of the Loseling and Gomang goes as partners.   

**Q:**  Would the two abbots discuss and ask for the permission from the government?   

**A:**  In general,the laji are the ones who actually present them to the government. The election abbot is the one who actually is the key one in making the decision and goes to the Yigtsang to inform them of the candidates and the laji actually bring backs the nominees when they laji meeitng was in session and the laji would show the seal of confirmation. Before the 2 abbot comes to the laji, 2 thapyog in white dress and hat "arsha [Tib. ཨ་ཞྭ] would stay there. And they send the thabyog to deliver the verbal message as to who is the senior shengo and the junior shengo. That day, the appointment letter, [Tib. འོས་རྒྱ] of the the senior shengo would be given to the ex-senior shengo and the appointment of the juinor shengo would be given to the ex-junior shego. Then the 2 ex-shengo would give the new ones khata. Then the ex-shengos would put their appointment letter on a plate with wheat in it. The new ex-senior gives the appointment letter to the new senior and ex-junior gives appointment letter to the new junior. And they would beat the gong on the inauguration day, [Tib. ཁྲི་འདོན].   

