# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Within this interview a number of issues are discussed, including procedural issues within monastic life such as rituals. Also discussed is the procedure for settling disputes between the shidü and miser and money lending practices. Also within the interview are issues between the Geshe and Pechawa prior to the Cultural Revolution and an examination of monastic practices in the past and how they compare to present day practices.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_05/M_0001_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The 40 shares of alms would go for the jiso?   

**A:**  No, this would go for chabu. And from that it would go to common usage for monks [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་སྤྱི་རྫས་ཁང].   

**Q:**  Tratsang trüku only get one share if they come to the tsog and they don't get an extra share from the gegö, right?.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So his share from the tratsang will be left with the gegö and this is owned by the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there any difference between böba or Khampa who go for the büdü [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] to collect the donation?   

**A:**  No. It depends on their knowledge. If there is some objection, they also ask for the divination to the lamas and the deities. Most of them were poor monks. Some of them were kind of stubborn [Tib. རུ་གྱོང་པོ] who refused to go but they still send them anyway.   

**Q:**  Were the clothes of the gegö called Dringal [Tib. སྒྲིག་འགལ] which means violation against the rule?   

**A:**  They do not have Dringal, but the umdze does. This was called Dringal because they put satin on the clothes which is not allowed for the tratsang monks to have. In the early times, a tratsang umdze became the tsogchen umdze and he wore that clothes because he didn't have time to change his clothes because he had to go to the manja right after that and then to the chöra. Since then it became a custom for the umdze to wear those clothes.   

**A:**  Who sits in the front row?   

**A:**  The ones who were above the tratsang trüku such as tsogchen trüku were allowed to sit at the front row. The top first is the trüku of the regents, gyeltrul [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྤྲུལ], the next is the trüku of the Ganden Tripa, tritrü [Tib. ཁྲི་སྤྲུལ] and then among the tratsang trüku, if they are the trüku of abbots, khentrul [Tib. མཁན་སྤྲུལ], they can sit at the front row and next are the ones with good voice for chanting prayers, dönsangnga [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་བ].   

**Q:**  These were the candidates of the umdze, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then the dönsangga and chöndze sits. Within dönsangga and chöndze, they sit by seniority. Then the monks by seniority. The umdze sits on a throne placed at the front row near the second pillar facing the door. The gegö sits on an earthen throne at the very end of the front row holding a kind of yellow stick called Seril [Tib. སེར་རིལ] wrapped with colored silks. This was a legal stick [Tib. ཁྲིམས་རྒྱུག]. In the tratsang they are not allowed to hold iron rod [Tib. ལྕགས་རྒྱུག] like the tshogchen shengo.   

**Q:**  Who tells them to serve the tea in the assembly hall?   

**A:**  In the tratsang it is the umdze. In the tshogchen, it is the lama migtsema [Tib. བླ་མ་དམིགས་བརྩེ་མ]. In tratsang when the umdze is chanting the prayer, the assistant jama, jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] has to watch him carefully and then he will turn his head a few times to give the jayog the signal to start the tea. Then the jayog will go to kitchen to start the serving. In the khamtsen, the khamtsen umdze also gives the signal. Even now, I am the umdze of Tsuglagang, I know how long the prayers are, so I just use my judgement when to give the signal.   

**Q:**  How do you decide what prayers to say on that day?   

**A:**  There are a number of prayers that have to be said in a year regularly.   

**Q:**  Was there a kind of book?   

**A:**  Yes. There is a fixed program of prayers that to be recited every day. The main prayers are the Dugsher Sengsum [Tib. གདུགས་ཤེས་སེང་གསུམ] and the mantra of the Longevity Deity, Tsesung [Tib. ཚེ་ཟུངས], Drölma. The prayers for the flourisihment of Buddhism [Tib. བསྟན་པ་རྒྱས་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ] and the Long Live Prayer for the Dalai Lama, the prayers for the 16 arhats, Neju [Tib. གནས་བཅུ]. And in addition to that there was chöjö [Tib. ཆོས་སྤྱོད] which is recited with chanting tone.   

**Q:**  This is the one with 116 pages, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you write in your book that such and such prayers should be said on particular dates?   

**A:**  There is not a particular set of dates, but it says on such and such holy days [Tib. དུས་བཟང] we should say such and such prayers like on some holy days, we say the prayers of the Uma Semkye [Tib. དབུ་མ་སེམས་སྐྱེད] and Ngöntog Gyen [Tib. མངོན་རྟོག་རྒྱན]. On the holy days, at least, there were four times tsog. Sometimes we make tsog feast offering according to Lama Chöpa [Tib. བླ་མ་མཆོད་པ].   

**Q:**  How about the ordinary days?   

**A:**  On the rest of the ordinary days the main prayers were sutras like Gyenjug Nyi [Tib. རྒྱན་འཇུག་གཉིས]; Ngöntog Gyen and the Uma Jugpa [Tib. དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པ] which are related to the tsenyi and very important ones.   

**Q:**  Did you make the decision to recite what prayers on what holy days?   

**A:**  Everthing was decided by the umdze and we have to finish reciting them. As for how much you recite on one session of the 4 assembly, this depends on the umdze. I also let some of the dönsangnga to lead the prayers according to the monk's seniority. This is for training the future umdze. For example, I came to Tsuglagang only in 1985, I didn't know how to perform the rituals because I didn't have the experience when I was small, but I was told to be the umdze. And there were some child monks who told me that they are my successors [Tib. ཤུལ་འཛིན་པ]. Then I said, "they will not become my successor by just saying they are the successor." We have been trained becoming the dönsangga for many years. According to my opinion, regularly, we should recite the prayers that was said on the Drepung Tsogchen and as for the Tantric Ritual [Tib. སྔགས་ཆོག], I think the Namgyal [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] Tratsang will be the best. I asked whether the Neighborhood Committee agree or not to my suggestion and all of them agreed to this and we pray everynight and 11-12 monks became quite good and we called the gegen called Lobsang Dorje [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ] from Namgyal Tratsang and taught them the rituals [Tib. ཆོ་ག].   

**Q:**  What are the rituials?   

**A:**  It was like the Jigje Dagkye [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་བདག་སྐྱེད].   

**Q:**  You mean the tantric rituals, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Left alone practicing, we didn't even know how to recite the tantric rituals. Even now I am 64 years, but I learnt it. I told the young monks, "I am not learning it for myself. I am learning it with the hope that you will learn it well. Now we are doing the Jigje Dagjug [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་བདག་འཇུག] once a month, when the older died the others would say that they didn't learn it." Now we are making tsog feast offering on the 10th in front of the Padmasambawa and also on the 25th [Tib. ཚེས་བཅུ་ཡར་ངོ་མར་ངོ].   

**Q:**  You didn't stay in Drepung, right?   

**A:**  I wouldn't go to Drepung because I was expelled from the monks kyidu.   

**Q:**  You can't change it, right?   

**A:**  Yes because the verdict was issued by the Dalai Lama, so unless he gives me exemption I won't go. Otherwise, I am not allowed because even when I recite a mani, I visualize the face of the Dalai Lama. So as a monk, it is not okay for me to go against him. So I adhere to his order. Although they called me to Drepung when the Panchen Lama first came. I just said yes and stayed in Tsuglagang because in the verdict I was allowed to go any where else. Even in the past, though the era [Tib. དུས་ཚོད] became like that, I have not disturbed the Dalai Lama's mind.   

**Q:**  Did all the monks in Gomang have to join one mitsen?   

**A:**  No they aren't. There were many monks who didn't have mitsen. It depends on where one belonged to, thopkung [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས] and one would have to join that.   

**Q:**  The chabu is powerful, right?   

**A:**  As for the chabu, it comes only from the 4 nachen [Tib. sna chen ?]; Gungru [Tib. གུང་རུ], Bati, Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] and Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ].   

**Q:**  How do they choose the chabu from among them?   

**A:**  They have the tsondu. There are many tsondu members in Hamdong and Samlo, so there is a large choice. But in Bati [Tib. ?] and Gungru there are only few monks, but they choose the better ones and the decision is made by the tsondu.   

**Q:**  The chabu does the secular work and were the officials such as nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང] and ngünyer under the chabu?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What is the relation between them and how would the chabu oversee them?   

**A:**  The chabu assembles regularly and when problems arise, he settles it. If the chabu can't settle, then it goes to tsondu with 14 members and if they can't settle it then it goes to the khamtsen 16.   

**Q:**  If there is a problem on the shiga between miser and the shidü who settles it?   

**A:**  The chabu settles it. If the chabu can't settle, then they hold the tsondu with 14 members, and if they can't settle it then it goes to the khamtsen 16.   

**Q:**  The nyertsang has no power to settle it?   

**A:**  No. But they were among the 14 members of the tsondu.   

**Q:**  The nyertsang might have some shiga?   

**A:**  Yes they had the shiga for the source of income. The nyertsang has 4 shiga: shangdon [Tib. zhang 'don ?], Jara Shiga [Tib. སྦྱར་རག] and gepa [Tib. གད་པ] Shiga and Nampa [Tib. རྣམ་པ] Shiga which they lease it out. These 4 are in Tölung Dechen Dzong [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་བདེ་ཆེན་རྫོང] and Dzem Samkhar [Tib. འཛེམ་བསམ, མཁར] Shiga in Chushü [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] and in Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ] there is a shiga called Barthang Kharnga [Tib. བར་ཐང་འཁར་རྔ] Shiga. Dzem Samkhar shiga in Chushü was also on lease. And it pays the lease in wheat. We grind 1,000 khe of wheat to be used for Tibetan New Year cookie [Tib. ཁ་ཟས]. This isn't enough, so we also give pees [Tib. སྲན་མ] to the miser in Chushü in spring without interest, but the miser has to give back wheat in fall. This is called santrödu [Tib. སྲན་སྤྲོད་འབྲུ]. This is measured by a tongbo [Tib. གཏོང་འབོ] which is a little smaller than the tenzin kharu. Each tongbo makes 13 cookie and each monk gets 5 cookie. The millers of the wheat are miser in Dzem. They give them the wheat after weighing it and then the miser clean the wheat and mill it in a water mill and then bring it back to the shiga. This is a corvée tax. Then there is also oil from the shiga both from lease and from miser's tax. The oil comes from Nyemo Barthang Kharnga Shiga. The lease fee is in oil and the miser have to give oil as part of their tax which is like 4 sowa [Tib. ཟོ་བ]. These shiga are all under the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  How many khe of land did the shiga have?   

**Q:**  I am not sure, but the shiga had at least 100 khe of land.   

**Q:**  These shiga were under the nyertsang and they have power to send the shidü or lease it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. For these all the power for sending shidü and settling disputes rests with the nyertsang. The nyertsang has to give all the traja for Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང]. The nyertsang gets 500 khe of butter from nomads in Yangbajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན] and the nyertsang has to buy 500-600 khe.   

**Q:**  The chabu is above nyertsang but can't they interfere in the operation of the running the shiga?   

**A:**  They can't.   

**Q:**  What kind of power did the chabu have?   

**A:**  The nyertsang's accounting on giving the tonggo is done by the uchö. And behind the uchö are the 4 chabu.   

**Q:**  Where do the ngünyer come from?   

**A:**  The tratsang chabu and abbot appoint them. The accounting for this rests on the chabu. The three joint ngünyer are sometimes called chibgyur ngünyer [Tib. ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་དངུལ་གཉེར] because as I told you before they were the in charge of making the arrangement for the Dalai Lama's visit to Drepung. And the alms share for the Dalai Lama's throne also goes to the chibgyur ngünyer.   

**Q:**  The ngünyer had the endowment money. If someone askd them to lend 1,000 dayang, could the ngünyer have the power to make the decision or to whom would they have to ask?   

**A:**  The ngünyer can lend money wherever they want on their own and nobody can meddle. When they do accounting it's the chabu who checks the money. If the money is missing and chabu can't settle the account, or if there is a big problem, then it goes to the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Can the ngünyer lagyüba or sometimes a geshe do that?   

**A:**  All were lagyüba who had the thön like ex-shengo, ex-gegö. They are mostly monks from good shagtsang. Once you complete ngünyer, they have the "thön".   

**Q:**  The thön was like an accomplishment, right?   

**A:**  Yes. E.G. You can wear different clothes like a satin vest and resom [Tib. རས་ཟོམ] boots. The nyertsang also have thön after they did the nyertsang which is very hard and mostly, they have become bankrupted, but it is like the stepping stone to getting the jiso position. You can't become jiso without being a nyertsang first.   

**Q:**  Who appoints the nyertsang?   

**A:**  First they report the abbot and then they were probably appointed by the local government. The government appoints: phodrang depa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ], shengo, jiso, chökhang [Tib. མཆོད་ཁང] parkhang [Tib. པར་ཁང] [depa], nyertsang. The government appoints it, but the candidates were made by the monastery and they send a list of 5 candidates. The government mostly appoints the first one usually. The shengo was also like this.   

**Q:**  The chabu in Gomang are all monks who came from long distance. What about the nyertsang?   

**A:**  The nyertsang is done by people like böba and Hor. The ngünyer are mostly böba.   

**Q:**  What about the Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  They are all monks who came from long distances and the böba didn't need to do that. Once they finish this job of Khamtsen gegen, they can enter the khamtsen tsondu. In Hamdong tsondu, there were about 40 people.   

**Q:**  Tell me about the shöndre.   

**A:**  As for the shöndre, Loseling has a lot, but Gomang has only a little. When you were small you like serving tea, chagde [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ] and a few other kinds of carrying tasks, but not much. The main job of the shöndre is going to tshog and chöra. Really, one should go to do these when one becomes a monk and say that I am going to be a monk. But this wasn't what really happens and only a few go to the chöra, the rest don't. They just stayed among the other monks, but their conduct was worse than the lay men. Therefore, there were the trouble.   

**Q:**  You said something that when you did the investigation on geshe situation after the government said that the number of geshe is becoming less, you found that even though there were some geshe, they were incomplete in studying all the grades. Is that right?   

**A:**  No. It was just that there were too few pechawa and there should be 60 geshe in one abbot's six-year term. Even if there were 15-20-30 geshe, it is okay, but there were only 5-6-3 geshe in one abbot's term. All people have interest in dodbdo and are not interested in pecha. If the revolt hadn't occcured, there would probably be no more geshe by this time in Gomang. So maybe we would have to have our old geshe pass the exam again to get some new numbers. That's why we couldn't take it and have to make a move. The government also gave the intruction on this saying, "the lene didn't take the responsiblity on the Buddhism" [Tib. ལས་ཀྱི་སྣེ་མོས་བསྟན་པའི་ཁུར་མ་སྐྱེད་པ], so they would definitely inquire who was the abbot, gegö and umdze when this situation was going on. So if we didn't try to do something, we would have a bad reputation like the proverb, "even after the dead body is buried underground, the talk about him will continue on the earth" [Tib. རོ་ས་འོག་ལ་ཡོད་ཀྱང་གཏམ་ས་སྟེང].   

**Q:**  Where does this number of 60 geshe in one abbot's time come from? Is it in the document [Tib. ཡིག་ཆ] or was it a custom?   

**A:**  There is no document. It is a custom. In Drepung, there were 4 tratsang and Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] has no geshe. The other three have. The highest geshe is lharamba [Tib. ལྷ་རམ་པ], the second is tsogrampa [Tib. ཚོགས་རམས་པ], the next is Lingse [Tib. གླིང་བསྲེ ] Kabre [Tib. ?] and Doramba [Tib. རྡོ་རམས་པ] and there were some difference on the number of geshe due to the size of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Loseling had more geshe?   

**A:**  Yes. More.   

**Q:**  Is it because Loseling is bigger?   

**A:**  Gomang is bigger. Actually, Ngagpa had a few (3-4) pechawa. We took them into our tratsang and they were in both of the tratsang who gave them equal salary and alms and they came to the chöra and the tsog. We did that with the idea that later if they pass the geshe, they will be under our name since ngagpa has no way of geshe. The abbot decided to do this with the ngagpa monks like a mutual agreeement.   

**Q:**  Did you ever actually pay the salary in the chöra when the abbot decided?   

**A:**  No. But before that, the government paid salary in the chöra and it became a large assembly. To have many monks in chöra, it is not so hard since they don't have to stay long. For example, we just have to say the following prayers Dukar [Tib. གདུགས་དཀར] 1x, Drölma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] 2x, Sherab Nyingpo [Tib. ཤེས་རབ་སྙིང་པོ] 3x. After this, the lagyüba can leave and the debaters would debate. Sometimes old monks come to chöra and they don't even know where to sit. There is a custom of thamja [Tib. དམ་བཅའ] where some monks sit in middle and the two rows on each side of them were the debaters who stand and ask question. No one is allowed to walk in the space between the two rows, if someone did, it is regarded very badly saying they cut off the debate, but sometimes these lagyüba don't even know this and walk there. Hamdong tsondu members were the worst monks who came to the chöra and didn't know where to sit. The reason is that, they became the khamtsen gegen when they were young and then went to tsondu and didn't go to tshog in order to collect their salary in front of the main gate, gomchor [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར], so they didn't pay much attention to the chöra.   

**Q:**  It was just a very few times when the government paid the salary in the chöra, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many times in a year did they pay the salary at the chöra?   

**A:**  Since then they started paying the salary in the chöra 3-4 times in a year. At first the government salary was paying in the tsog. Later the government changed and paid it in the chöra. Because of this some more monks came to chöra and the tsog became big and from these a few monks got interested and became pechawa and completed their study.   

**Q:**  Did the government pay the salary in the chöra at your time?   

**A:**  This was in 1958 when there was trouble. Before that, in the years 1955-57 the government was paying the salary at the chöra.   

**Q:**  After they paid the salary at the chöra, how many monks started learning the pecha?   

**A:**  There were were about 5-6 of them. Also there were some monks who weren't capable of learning pecha, but liked coming to chöra and doing prayers so they came all the time. I have thought that it's okay if you can't be pechawa if you come all the time to chöra. I would tell them, "Now you have got the realization and this is the monk's job. In your next life this will help. If you don't adhere to the discipline well in this life you won't be happy in this life and in your next life also."   

**Q:**  Comparing the monk's discipline in the present with the time when you were a umdze in the past, is it the same?   

**A:**  It is not same in the present bacause we are not allowed to scold the child monks let alone beat them. They are saying that scolding is an old habit. I heard they gave this insruction from the Religious Assoctiation [Tib. ཆོས་ཚོགས] knowing I was not there. The masses heard this and the child monks standard is also high and they say, "thaijinai" [must be a unclear broken Chinese, can't understand], [laughter] so there is no discipline.   

**Q:**  Sometimes when I go there, they are debating?   

**A:**  Yes, they do and there is debate in the the Tsuglagang also. There are 3 gegen teaching the pecha and there is debate also. From 6:30-7:30 p.m there is tshenyi debate, then there is a kamtshog. [Tib. སྐམ་ཚོགས] tsog with no tea. Then we put off the butter lamps and then it is finished. Then in the morning at 7:30 a.m we open the main door and light the butter lamps.   

**Q:**  Is the standard of learning pecha in present and in the past the same?   

**A:**  It is not same. I became a monk when I was 7 years old and we started learning from the alpahabets. But now, if they become a monk in the morning, they would come bringing their pecha. This is by the grace of the schools. But they don't adhere to the discipline and do reckless things. This is due to the Party spoiling them. [laughter]. Actually, the monk's vow is not an easy one which is related to one's next life. In the past, once you became monk you gave up laymen's clothes, but now they wear both. But we can't blame them because in the past, when you become a monk you don't need to work. But now since they have to work and in the monasteries the monks have to go to work on earth and rock. In the Tsuglagang, the monks work as caretakers and just handle people who came for ther pilgrimage to the temple. There was an organization in Drepung for splitting rocks. Once I went to visit a geshe in Drepung and his gidru came and he told the geshe that he had been given permit to be monk. The teacher asked him where were you assigned to work, he said, I am breaking rocks. Then I said, "Oh! do you have to do that? It seems that you left a job and got a another job. So do you have time to study pecha?" The teacher said they have to work to earn a living. But now they are not breaking rocks, but still it is like this and there are some monks working on the construction and all the young ones working in that. Therefore they don't have any choice but to wear layman's clothes. In past, in Loseling and Gomang etc., each tratsang handles its own affairs and for mangja [Tib. མང་ཇ] it is for everyone, it is given by the dewashung. The government gave mangja every day. It was 4 teas. Each tea had 9 khe of butter, so there was 36 khe of butter per day. [this is 13,140 khe of butter per year = about 7 kama/ khe of butter.] Because of this in the old society we used to have a saying, "the Tibetan Government is the sponsor of Buddhism and offering [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཆོས་སྦྱིན་གྱི་མངའ་བདག་གཞུང་ས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང་ཆེན་པོ]. The second best sponsor was Shatra.[Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] They also offer a lot for butter lamps which is offered all the time.   

**Q:**  Was it the same amount of butter put in the mangja and traja?   

**A:**  In traja they put 4 khe of butter per tea and it is 16 khe of butter for 4 tea in a traja. This is given by the nyertsang. It is said that Drepung has 7,700 monks, but actually there were 10,000. Later Gomang had about 4,000 monks and Loseling 5,000. For one manja, they put 9 khe of butter and it is 36 khe of butter for 4 mangja.   

**Q:**  How much tea was used in these?   

**A:**  I am not sure about this. It must be in the manja, they use one big brick of tea, bakhag [Tib. སྦག་ཁག] which had 4 small bricks of tea, bagchung [Tib. སྦག་ཆུང] per tea, so 16 bagchung for 4 mangja. In one traja, we use 2 bagjung which is 8 bagchung per 4 traja. Actually we weigh the tea (and butter) so sometimes we add a little more than 2 bagchung. In our tratsang, when we make tea, the tea comes from the nyertsang and we grind it on a square rock on the Gomang's roof. When we take and weigh this tea, the representative of the labrang and the Nangma [Tib. ནང་མ] of the gegö would come there. In the past, propbably the Labrang chandzö and gegö themselves came to oversee this, later the other two came as the representatives of these two. After the tea is pulverized, then it is taken to the kitchen and put in the cauldron. And the caldron is covered with the rug made from yak hair [Tib. རྩིད་པ]. And on the rug, they but seals of earth [Tib. ས་དམ] on the 4 corners by the nangma.   

**Q:**  The tea and the butter was given by the nyertsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  To whom the nyertsang would give the tea and butter?   

**A:**  They would give it to the reprersentative of the labrang and the Nangma of gegö. Then the butter comes in big loads wrapped with skin [Tib. ལྟང] and this has to be made into balls of 4 khe each the night before. These are put in the nyertsang overnight with some kind of seal on them. The next morning, the representative labrang and nangma get the butter and bring it to the kitchen [thabyog carry it], and in the kitchen the nyertsang has representatives who come and stand by while the thabyog make the butter in small pieces to be ready to be uses. The representative of nyertsang has to stand there until the butter is used in the tea.   

**Q:**  Who carries those things from the nyertsang to the kitchen?   

**A:**  This is done by the thabyog.   

**Q:**  What does the Tratsang jama do?   

**A:**  The jama would stay in the kitchen all the time. In the past, the jama also had the responsibility of providing all the firewood for the tratsang. But later the Drepung jiso was made to provide the tratsang firewood and the tratsang jama was attached to the jiso.   

**Q:**  When did this change occur?   

**A:**  About in 1950-51 when they cut many trees in Nortölinga during the time of Jigyab khenpo Gyanbungkhang [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང].   

**Q:**  How did the jama do this before the new rule was made? Did he have a big endowment?   

**A:**  In the past, they would buy the firewood and they also have a thön and they were appointed from the better off shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Did they have an endowment for this?   

**A:**  I don't think so. Even if they had, they might have had a little amount. The jiso had to provide the firewood for the Drepung Tsogchen and tsogchen jama was also send from the jiso.   

**Q:**  Did the Gomang only attach the jama to the jiso or the other tratsang also did that?   

**A:**  I am not sure about the other tratsang. It was during the time of the Jiso Tagkharel [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ].   

**Q:**  Tagkharel was the jiso until 1956 and his term was 10 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I think he had an 11-year term. I heard that he had an extra year when the Dalai Lama visited Drepung, but I am not sure.   

**Q:**  I heard that he got 2 more years term because the Dalai Lama attended the assembly, tshogpheb [Tib. ཚོགས་ཕེབས] and the jiso had to meet these extra expenses.   

**A:**  All of these extra expenses are spent by the jiso, but the jiso also had an amazing income.   

**Q:**  They were like the dewashung, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In general he got the income by not giving the things that ought to be given to the monks like blocking the mouths of the monks [Tib. གྲྭ་པའི་ཁ་བཀག].   

