# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee discusses how alms were distributed for the salaries of the abbots and monks. He describes how different positions among the monks were designated varying levels of alms as salaries. Details are provided on when, how, by whom, and in what context alms were distributed in the monastery. The interviewee also provides details on how alms were collected and how monks were sent into the community to receive alms. Additionally, issues related to the demands of lay persons on monks for divination practices and rituals are discussed and how this generates tensions for monks when they venture into the communities.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_02/M_0001_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me about alms and salary in Gomang Tratsang?   

**A:**  With regard to the alms, the abbot got 30 shares. For example, if a regular monk got 1 he got 30. Alms have higher shares than salary. Then the uchö and gegö got 10 shares in tshog and traja and got 2 shares for being in tshondü 14. Making a total of 14 shares. The umdze got 9 shares in tsog and 2 in tsondu making 11 shares. Everyone in tsongdu 14 got 2 extra shares. As to the tsondü, I forgot the two nyertsang and 1 nayog yesterday. [80] Whenever there are alms in the tshog shung they got the 2 extra alms in the tsondu also. There were the 7 main officials in Tratsang, laji gegö, umdze, 2 chabril chabyog, 2 jama, jayog 1 nangma. I think the ones, other then uchö, each got 2 shares. The nangma served as a kind of servant for the gegö. The chabu and nyertsang didn't get any extra shares in tshog shung. But they got the 2 extra from the tsondu. The Tshogchen trülku also got extra shares. Tratsang trülku wouldn't get extra, they just got one share. Among the tshogchen trülku there was the gyaltrül which was highest [ones who have done Regent], then there was the tritrül - ones who had been Tri Rimpche at Ganden. In Gomang, the Duwa khembo also got extra shares, probably no more then 2-3 shares. The gyaltrül got about 7-8 extra shares [not sure], and the gyaltrül may have gotten about 15 [?] shares but I am not sure. Also the Tratsang chöndze and trülku got one alms in Tratsang without having to come in person. They could have someone else pick up their share. If they do come, then they got their share in the tshog rather than outside, and the share they would have gotten outside, goes to the gegö who would use this to help finance the Donggo he had to throw at the end of his 6 month term. At the time of the winter session the günchö gegö was always a geshe and at the time of summer session yarchö gegö would be lagyuba. This gegö's donggo involves giving a traja and thugdö thugdö was the case equivalent of the actual thugba -- this usually costs about 1-3 sho per monk in the Tratsang. There are about 100+ enchöndze (Lama, Tratsang chöndze). They all had the special privilege of not having to come to get their alms. The gegö carried this outside in a special kind of purse. And he gave alms to each of the enchöndze who are specified on a list of those with this special privilege. [172] So if they came to [?] tshog, then the gegö doesn't have to pay these alms after tshog, so he can pocket this and use it for his tonggo. It's one of his incomes. The gegö sometimes tells the enchöndze, today come to tsho, so that he could make some income. Alms were usually not very high. 1 trangga 3 sho (2 tranga) or 5 sho. The highest was one sang (= 10 sho). This was old custom (for paying), it didn't start during our memory (time).   

**Q:**  Are the enchöndze in 7 monastic officials?   

**A:**  No. [more on this later] To become Tratsang Chöndze you have to give a donggo. You have to give gye and thugdö. There are no extra shares for the thugdü. Even the abbot only got one share. The chöndze rank was bought, not earned by studying pecha. They didn't study pecha. They would give a mediocre alms and thugdö, and then be able to sit above their teachers. Normally, it's not too notable, but at Mönlam the chöndze sit in a row, and then under this was the first name list tsentho (row) of the monks. [199] During my time, there were a lot of chöndze being done but they were giving as little as possible--only giving mediocre donggo. Really for a traja you should be giving 8-9 khe of butter since this was a special rank, but they were giving only 4 khe which was the amount the nyertsang gives in normal traja. It was getting so bad. That he and his Tratsang gegö decided a new rule should be made to set standards for getting Gomang Tratsang chöndze. We had discussions and people said for supply rite for chöndze, we should weigh the tea and butter by jin. Everyone must give 1000 offerings insisted of butter lamps torma, and water offering incense and flower, tongchö. In past, the candidates didn't give tongchö and just left 3 sang of money, and gave 1 trangka was one sho and five karma for alms. So we made proposal that from now on they had to weight butter and tea, and offer 1000 butter lamps, or in its place give each monk 1 trangka. The monk also has to leave an amount of money call bungjo. This was for chagbug's use. It used to be 7 dotse and was increased 50 dotse. Unless monks offer these tonggo, they can't become chöndze. Only Gomang has this custom of tongchö for chöndze. The standard for the chöndze's traja, fixed was 8 khe of butter and 2 bagjung bricks of tea. There were 4 bagchung in one package call bagkhag. If tomorrow was going to be a chöndze dongo, tonight jama and uchö have to go to weight the butter. On top there was alms. There was no standard for this. Whatever one gave so long as it was not less than 1 tranka. In the past, for the thugdö the fee was 6 tranka, then it deteriorated to 2-3 sang, so we made the new rule.   

**Q:**  This happened during your time in office?   

**A:**  Yes. We first asked the tsondu 14, then when they agreed, we asked the abbot for final okay.   

**Q:**  Who came up with the idea?   

**A:**  It was me and the gegö. There were many chöndze, and the old monks would have to sit behind, and among all of them probably they were not almost pechawa.   

**Q:**  How did enchöndze get their alms if they didn't go to traja?   

**A:**  They could send someone to collect alms at gegö's shag. If it was salary they had to send a gitru to collect the salary when the names were read at the front of the main gate, gomjo. Chöndze had to ask permission to not attend tshog from gegö. The term for gegö was 6 months. After every 6 months, a new gegö comes. Umdze also had to ask. I am not sure if abbot has to do this. Umdze, e.g., also has to ask permission to wear a surge, therma sen instead of a surge gonam sen, and cloth shirt under sen, and certain vest etc. [303] I had to write a petition and give 2 sho to gegö. In the past, one umdze of Gomang became the Tshogchen umdze so after that all the umdze of Gomang were entitled to wear the clothes of the Tshogchen umdze. These were called Dringe thulog. Also all of those who were of the rank nyetsang and above could wear the kind of boots called resom. The rest wore shasumma boots. I also had to do servant yogo and I had to give the gegö their name and class number. They got permission to not attend tshog and chöra. In reality the gegö should have been checking precisely who was in each class and if they were present or not, so this permission was to cover this, but in truth no one checked who was in class like that in his day. This was a special authority. Later, in my time not many people even bothered to ask the gegö for this permission. Back to alms. The Dalai Lama's throne got 40 shares.   

**Q:**  How did monks know whether there was alms?   

**A:**  We give a message. There was a special big drum we beat to inform monks of this. And at the end of the morning session gegö will check [monks] tsizhag today.   

**Q:**  How did you and the gegö know there would be a distribution of alms on a given day?   

**A:**  The sponsor who was giving alms had to come to the khamtsen to which he belonged and make relations with them. So if it was Hamdong khamtsen, he went to the jama of Hamdong and the jama had to ask permission from the Labrang, the üjo and the 14 tshondu. If there was a tongchö then he asks to do this and have monks do the prayers associated with it. He gave the Labrang a chigye [7 and half karma], and gave the gegö and jama one karma. He asked the umdze to do the appropriate prayer for tongchö to Jamgon Lama and gave a tranga. Couldn't do a choga since there were no instruments in Gomang because only sutra studies were done there.   

**Q:**  This was just for when sponsors came hand in hand with alms etc. But were there also alms from trust funds?   

**A:**  No, if it was from a trust it was called salary in Gomang. For salary the different capital fund were divided among different sets of ngünye. Sometimes 2 ngünye and sometimes there are three 3 together and 4 together. They kept charge of the capital fund and lend out the money. The interest from this was what was paid as salary. The gegö changes every 6 months, so there was a six month accounting we do. There was a book called salary book, phog deb which lists all the salary that had to be given each six months, and this book was kept by the uchö. If the salary was paid exactly as in the book, then the uchö would give the ngünye a receipt saying they did it. The accounting takes a day. If they have forgotten to do one or one was missing, then the uchö would tell them to do it the next day. The general customs and rules of doing work in the monastery were terrific, but the practice was poor and there were many difficulties because of this. The uchö particular had a heavy responsibility.   

**Q:**  How did you give alms in the in the assembly hall when there was traja or tshog?   

**A:**  There were two ways we did this: monks are seated and usually 3 people went around. The first would say, "put out your hand" cha thethe, the 2nd would put the money into the hand, and the third would carry the money bag. There was also the custom that if the alms was 2 sang, then if the money was 1 silver coin trankga karpo (4 sang), then they would give 1 silver coin for 2 monks. If this happened, then the first monk would say two of you put out your hand jig nyi cha thethe. The second way was to have two lines (called shag khag) of monks filing out by the main door. The other door called jago was closed. Someone stood on each side and gave the monks in the line on his side the alms. The monks would leave as they got alms. The money givers stood on the doorstep itself.   

**Q:**  Who gave this money?   

**A:**  There was a monk called gye gtong jikyabba. He was hired by the jama for the sponsor. There were a number of monks who were specialists in doing this. They were hired and they had to memorize all the different amounts of shares, for example that 40 shares went to the throne of the Dalai Lama, etc. They were like professionals.   

**Q:**  Did they get wages?   

**A:**  The sponsor probably said thank you and gave them some things, but there was no set amount.   

**Q:**  Did he read a book with the names of all the monks in the tshog at the time of giving alms?   

**A:**  No I don't think so. At the end of the tshog, the special privilege officials wait outside. After the tshog was over, then they read the list of names of those who had special privileges. The list would be read under the gomchor by the umdze. (the gegö stays there also). He read the list of the shares. First he read the list of the shares of the abbot and trüku, for example he would read, "the abbot gets 30 shares" (khen rimpoche kugye sumju thampa), and then maybe the Duwa abbot will get such and such a share. When the umdze reads this, the representative of the trüku will come at once and pick up the share. Someone always picked up all the shares for those who were not there. When he finished the list of enchöndze, then the list of lower officials was read, e.g.,. those who manage buildings, the monks in charge of the chöra, the monks who look after the trees in parks, the sweepers, and kitchen helpers. I had to read this list. But sometimes the sponsor wraps all the shares in an envelope and puts names on it. In this case, the umdze doesn't have to read it. If it was not wrapped like this, then it took a long time. On the days of giving alms, the uchö didn't go to the chöra. They sent replacements to the chöra. The monks who went for collecting donation, büdü would get double share. Normally not more than 5 monks were sent on büdü. Gomang has only three places we sent people: Dzogde [?] Amdo, Sog, Nyengrong Damshung. These places were ours [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས]. Also there was a list of those who have been sent as abbot of a Branch Monastery.   

**Q:**  Did they send estate manager shidö to collect the donation?   

**A:**  They were mostly chöndze, who were going as büdü. So they had their share anyway and it was picked up for them. If the shidö wasn't a chöndze but was a regular monk, then he had to come in person. Doing büdü was a real complicated process. A geshe was selected by seniority. He had to know a good bit of religion. No more than 5 could go as düdü. After this was settled, then these 5 people's would sell all their shag's belongings. And for the last few weeks before leaving they moved into Tratsang Rabsel (the building where the offices are) since they had given up their shag. The money from the sale of their things was left with the Tratsang. Everything they will need on this trip and their stay for several years was bought by the Tratsang. They were going in essence to beg for donations. Then they left and stayed for whatever the term, 3-4-5 years, and then they would return. When they returned, they went straight to under the gomchor to unload the loads there, and they stayed in Tratsang at first until they got a new shag. Then they did accounting.   

**Q:**  How much were the expenses before they left? What expenses did they have while there and on the road?   

**A:**  Then they calculate how much they obtained in büdü. They subtracted all the expenses from what the yield was, and the left over money was given to the monks as alms of 1-2-3 dayan per monk. All this was read in a kyabtho in tshog. If the head monk did very well as büdü then the Tratsang would give him a rank of Tratsang trüku or chöndze or the rank of ex Tratsang gegö. The highest rank he will get was Tratsang trülku. This was lower than khentrül. This was all under the chagbug. After they gave the alms if there was money left over, it went into the capital of the bug the chabug. [41] When this was all done, the lama and monks were returned the money from their belongings together with the interest from lending out this money. Then in addition to this they are given the alms and salary that had accumulated and their interests during their absence, and if they did well also some gifts of tables and chests for shag. The Tratsang chagbug had a lot of income, but the chagbug was not very generous. They were very careful about expenses. They gave us food at the tsondu 14 but it was not aristocrat's food. It was rather stingy. [This was generally said about monks]. Gomang had many houses in Lhasa. The rent was 6 sang and 5 sho. They didn't spend all this, they put away in the storehouse. They didn't spend it.   

**Q:**  What happens if the monk has shagtsang and gidru then he won't sell his things before going to büdü?   

**A:**  Probably no large shagtsang would go as büdü lama [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད་བླ་མ]. So this never happened. I had a gegen called Yanggi gegan. He went to Sogdzong [Tib. སོག་ཛོང] as büdü. He said it wasn't easy. When you arrive there are many people asking to do ritual and divination at once, and some of these aren't successful [e.g., a man goes bankrupt] and if you don't do divination well then the miser won't have faith to you. Sometimes, even bandits came to ask where to go rob, and you had to do divination and say it's better to go there versus some other place. In Amdo at age 15 the household gives a boy a horse, sword and gun, and then he was a man and goes off to raid others. Then they come back and raid him. The local people also asked all kinds of questions as a sort of test to see if he knows anything. But he has to be very careful in the first phase or the miser will not have faith and therefore would not give donations. [174] To be successful, the Lama must have a good nyerba or chandzö to manage what was given. If the nyerba steals-i.e. doesn't give all to Dratsaan that was also bad and he would have a short life.   

**Q:**  Who picked the abbots of branch Monastery, gonlag [Tib. དགོན་ལག] and büdü?   

**A:**  The Tratsang chabu did it. The uchü didn't do it. All these secular things of the Tratsang the chabu do. If there was something particularly troublesome then the tsondu 14 was convened. If there was big trouble then the Khamtsen 16 was convened. All the lists of the money, grain, oil, etc were with uchü, but we had no power. We only did accounting. All the power over these was with the chagbug. The abbot was involved since his Labrang chandzö meets with the chagbug. They would ask the abbot briefly if we did this, was it okay, etc., and he would say yes if it's about loans and money etc. You needed a very good person for chagbug, but Gomang didn't have these since the monks from Central Tibet böpa weren't allowed to do it and it was all Amdos and khambas. But the Dtratsang chabril, could only be böpa. The chabril was the one who keeps an eye on the chagbug but that was decided by seniority, mintsam and he had no influence or power. Even if he said something, they wouldn't listen.   

**Q:**  Did geshe liked to go on büdü?   

**A:**  Some of them liked to go because of the receiving of rank later. Some of them didn't want to go since there was a risk to ones life. The danger was on the road. It was long. They carry 500 dayan on each side, but these often break though. If you do well on büdü, the alms was 2 dayan and traja and a good rice gruel (dotse 1000 cost). We sent someone continuously to these three areas. There have been many büdü who never came back. The Dragyun from Sogde and Dzogi [?] are our thabkung. So they had to come to Gomang.   

**Q:**  With alms did you give outside first or inside first?   

**A:**  In Gomang Tratsang we didn't give the money outside. If there are monks outside waiting for alms, we brought them inside at the start of the 2 shaggag and gave them to the door. In the Tsogchen they gave gelen outside. In Gomang, even those outside had to wear their dagam. In the tshogchen they didn't have to wear dagam.   

**Q:**  He read their names?   

**A:**  No. The reading of names was for the special privilege ones. This he sits after the alms was given outside in the gomchor and read their names and they came to get it.   

**Q:**  Can anyone not go to alms [?] and wait outside?   

**A:**  Yes. There was no asking of special permission. There weren't too many of these.   

**Q:**  Please explain about the salary?   

**A:**  In money salary (versus grain salary), the amount of extra shares was less. For example, the abbot got only 7 shares. The throne was about 40 shares. The gegö and umdze got three shares.   

**Q:**  Where did the money come from for salary?   

**A:**  The money for salary came from trust funds and surba [?] (people who give on the spot without leaving capital). There was a fixed schedule for this. For a one tranga distribution, have to give 50 dotse in capital.   

**Q:**  Did the monks get 100-200 sang in salary a year?   

**A:**  No they got less. Salary was given under the gomchor. The Umdze reads the monks name list. While this was being read the monks file through for their salary in one line. The monks know the order roughly. So they go through in that order of hierarchy, and there was really no direct correlation between monks line and the umdze's reading of the names. The amount of time taken to read the list was about the same time as saying the prayer for gyetong prayer. [i.e. long] With salary there are several "donations" for example, pendzö donation (for the expenses of printing books etc.), tsontsi donation (painting the pillars etc.), donation of gold, drangser (for putting new gold on face of gods), [Tib.དབྱར་གསོལ] donation (for giving food to enchöndze and monastic official when they went to do yarsol in Gadong every summer) and [Tib. ཚོགས་གདན] donation for (this was for new rugs in tshog). These donations had no fixed amounts to be distributed. It depended on how much the sponsor gave. These donations were collected by the chagbug and they gave the money to the uchö who held it for 6 months. At the end of the 6 months there was the uchö would settle the account called dumtsi (sdom rtsis) where the 7 Tratsang officials come. It took all day. The food for this was done in turns by the 7 monastic officials. They gave just food and tea, since it was money from private. Then after the 6 months, they give the money to each of the appropriate sections, e.g. library to library, the yarsö donation to the joint three ngünye; Tsondrü, Thonden and Seso. Money was given to the Chagbug. [436] The money that was held for 6 months was lent out on interest, and this interest was given to the monks as salary even if it was only a small amount. The sponsor couldn't give only to monks, he had to give to donation also, although there was no rule how much he had to give as donation.   

**Q:**  I heard there was special share of salary to the librarian?   

**A:**  If the salary comes from trust, then the 5 sources got 2-3 shares, although it was expressed as donation rather than salary. There was a fixed amount for this on all trust. If you were ex-official the salary distribution, the sponsor gave pretty much the same as the regular trust distributions were given.   

**Q:**  Did the monastic official Lama migtsemba and shunglemba get shares?   

**A:**  They were involved in tshogchen. They didn't get share. But Lama migtsemba comes from Gomang so he may have gotten a share. I am not sure. It was said that they can get shares in all Tratsang, but in fact, I think they didn't.   

**Q:**  Was it in your list dose Lama migtsmema got share?   

**A:**  No it's not so he must not got Tratsang share. They may come in person to get, but they are not on the list of giving the share of alms. [Tib. སྐལ་གཏོང་རྩ་ཚིག]   

**Q:**  Some monks didn't have to come in person. It was the same for both alms and salary. Those who had the special right to get their share without coming, did so by sending gedrug etc?   

**A:**  For salary all the monks have to collect under the gomchor before I started to read the list.   

**Q:**  How many enchöndze were there?   

**A:**  A little less than 200.   

**Q:**  What exactly was enchöndze?   

**A:**  Chöndze (about 100 of these), lama, shung shab (all the monk official in government whose thobkhung was Gomang), Barkhang Jokhang, Photrang deba, abbot and ex-abbot, Jiso and ex jiso [Tib. ཟུར་པ]. These last three were part of the Laji chungga "assembly."   

