# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.15 : Tape 15  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་དགེ, འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 17 June 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་དགེ, འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 69  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee discusses a number of topics related to monastery rituals and the positions and responsibilities during these rituals. Included in this interview are descriptions of issues surrounding admission to Hor Mitsen, and the nyerpa and cashier’s responsibilities of the distribution of food and tea during particular rites. The interviewee discussion about the serving of tea and food during the Nyerpa Düsang and details regarding the days it is served and the processes involved. There is also a discussion the requests to mitsen and khamsten in relation to jayig. He gives details of the regulations of nyerpa spending money on particular rituals. There are also details of voices used in particular prayer rituals and the performance of Mönlam Umze. The interviewee describes the practice of dzoke, and the relationship between the branch monastery and the great monastic seats and details on the ranks of the abbots and how this achieved.   

---  
### Tape 15  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_15/M_0001_15.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Did the Hor Mitsen have chandzö?   

**A:**  Yes, they had the chandzö and if the monks got into a fight, they would hold the meeting called the four chandzö and nyerpa, Nyerchagshi [Tib. གཉེར་ཕྱག་བཞི]. If they couldn't decide the matter, they would report to the tsondu. I forgot all these things because it has been long time.   

**Q:**  In Tsokhag, [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ] Mitsen, they had chandzö and after being a chandzö, then you could speak out in the tsondu. So the Hor and Tsokhag were same, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we came from the Central Tibet [Tib. བོད་རིགས], so we don't know about the internal ideology, but we didn't have to deal with [Tib. ཇུས་གཏོགས] anything except the grain nyerpa, drunyer, [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར]. If you came from the north, Hor, then you had to do everything.   

**Q:**  For example, in Hor Mitsen if you were a böpa you didn't have to deal with tsondu and if you came from Hor then you had to deal with the tsondu. What if there were Khampas? Did they have to deal with the tsondu?   

**A:**  The Khampas won't get admission in to the mitsen. The mitsen was only for the Horpa.   

**Q:**  In Hor Mitsen, they would give admission mainly to the Horpa and 5 böpa would gain admission a year.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the Hor Mitsen, there were no Khampas, Mongolian and Amdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were not allowed to be admitted.   

**Q:**  When did the cashiers give the tonggo called Nyünyer Düsang [Tib. དངུལ་གཉེར་དུས་བཟང]?   

**A:**  They would supply it in the month commemorating the Birth, Enlightenment and Parinirvana of the Buddha, Sakadawa [Tib. ས་ག་ཟླ་བ]. And the cashier would supply tea in the khamtsen, tshomja [Tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] for two days on the monastic rite. Some of the cashier would supply tsomja for three days.   

**Q:**  The nyerpa's called Nyerpa Düsang would be supplied when they change the nyerpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The cashier's tonggo called Ngünyer Düsang would be supplied on the religious festival days?   

**A:**  Yes, there were two kinds of cashiers.   

**Q:**  As you said there was a joint of two nyerpa [Tib. ཉིས་སྦྲེལ] and a joint of three nyerpa [Tib. སུམ་སྦྲེལ]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the cashiers should give the tonggo on all of the religious festivals?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many years was the term for the cashier?   

**A:**  I think the cashier's term was for three years.   

**Q:**  At the time you finished your turn for the cashier, were there any tonggo that should be supplied for 4 days?   

**A:**  After you finished your turn for the cashier, then the new cashier would come. Anyhow, they had to supply the tsomja. They could not miss it.   

**Q:**  The Nyerpa Düsang would be supplied for 4 days at the time of finishing nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes, there was also the Tara, Drölmai Düsang [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མའི་དུས་བཟང] for 4 days.   

**Q:**  The cashier would supply the düsang or what?   

**A:**  No, this would be supplied by the Tatra Labrang.   

**Q:**  The Taktra Labrang would supply in the 10th month, right?   

**A:**  They would supply it on the 1st - 4th of 10th month.   

**Q:**  On which date would the Nyerpa Düsang be?   

**A:**  It would be on the 12th -15th of 10th month.   

**Q:**  That was the 10th Tibetan month?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So when I guess, the 12th of 10th month was the day of changing the nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes, that is right.   

**Q:**  When two cashiers or when three cashiers supplied their tonggo, did they supply it together or separately?   

**A:**  Normally, they would supply the tonggo separately. For example, if there were two cashiers or three cashiers or even if there were four cashiers, they would lend their capital as a loan in the north. At the time of supplying for the tsomja then they would come to supply it.   

**Q:**  For example, there was a group of two cashiers and a group of three cashiers and if the Sakadawa tonggo was the turn of the group of two cashiers, the turn for supplying the tsomja would not reach on the same day for the group of three nyerpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the joint of three cashiers wouldn't reach the turn for tsomja on that day. For example, if the group of three cashiers would supply the tonggo on the Sagadawa, the group of the two cashiers wouldn't meddle with them.   

**Q:**  And the group of two cashiers would supply it on the 4th of the 6th month, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They had a fixed rule on that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Nyerpa Düsang was for 4 days?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many teas and thukpa would they serve in a day?   

**A:**  There were a lot. In the morning, there were 3 teas and one rice porridge as thick as yogurt. In the midmorning of the first day of the assembly, they would serve 2 teas and one ladle of sweet potatoes and one ladle of melted butter, Droma marku [Tib. གྲོ་མ་མར་ཁུ] and sugar. On the 2nd day, they would serve thashi, [Tib. ཐ་ཞི] [rice soup with chopped meat]. On the third day, they would serve one ladle of rice with a little yogurt.   

**Q:**  On the first day, they would serve Droma Marku and on 2nd day they would serve thashi?   

**A:**  They would serve thashi and rice for every day during the 4 days.   

**Q:**  What would they serve in one day, in the morning 3 teas and one rice porridge?   

**A:**  We would call it 1st session of the midmorning [Tib. ཚ་རྟིང་དང་པོ] they would serve 2 tea and Droma Marku. In 2nd session of the midmorning, they would serve 2 teas and thashi. On the 3rd session of the midmorning, they would serve two teas and rice and yogurt. Then as for the lunch, gungtsig, [Tib. གུང་ཚིགས] they would serve 4 tear and thukpa.   

**Q:**  What kind of thukpa would they serve?   

**A:**  They would serve rice gruel, mingtag, [Tib. མིང་བཏགས] If there were Geshe [Tib. དགེ་ཤེས] giving tonggo for their exam and lamas and tratsang chandzö giving tonggo in that year, these all would be helpful for the nyerpa to supply for the Düsang.   

**Q:**  These were the graduations from this tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So these graduation tonggo would help the nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For example, when they gave tonggo for the tratsang chandzö, they would serve tea and rice gruel to the tratsang, right?   

**A:**  No, they would pay money in place of rice gruel to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did they serve something to the mitsen?   

**A:**  They would serve one lunch at the time of the nyerpa düsang. For the lunch they would serve 3 teas and one thashi and an evening tea.   

**Q:**  When there were two chöndze giving tonggo, would one of them serve 3 teas and rice with yogurt and another chöndze will serve lunch?   

**A:**  No, they would serve only lunch. And they had to serve 4 lunches. If there were sponsors, then the 4 lunch should be supplied by the sponsors.   

**Q:**  For example, if there were 4 sponsors then one of them would serve Droma Marku and one would serve thashi and one would serve rice gruel or all of the sponsor would serve rice gruel?   

**A:**  All the sponsors would serve rice gruel.   

**Q:**  After they finished serving lunch then they would serve tea in the evening?   

**A:**  They would serve evening tea. They would serve two teas. On the final evening on the 15th, there were 3 evening tea sessions.   

**Q:**  This was on the last evening?   

**A:**  Yes, that would be on the evening of 15th and there were 3 evening tea sessions and each session had two teas.   

**Q:**  Two teas would be served in each evening tea sessions?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If they had three evening sessions then they would serve 6 teas?   

**A:**  They would serve 6 teas and at the last session they would serve 3 teas, so altogether they would serve 7 teas and they would pray tea prayer called Khordewoser [Tib. འཁོར་འདས་འོད་ཟེར].   

**Q:**  This was on the 12th day and on 13th day they didn't serve Droma Marku?   

**A:**  They would serve only one Droma Marku.   

**Q:**  What would they serve in place for the Droma Markhu?   

**A:**  They would serve thashi and after that they would serve rice and yogurt.   

**Q:**  After that, they would serve rice gruel?   

**A:**  For the first day, there were 3 sessions.   

**Q:**  For the first day, there was Droma Markhu and then thashi, rice with yogurt, and rice gruel. There were 4 sessions altogether, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about on the 2nd day?   

**A:**  There were three midmorning sessions. On the 1st midmorning session, they would serve thashi and for the 2nd they would rice with yogurt. On the 3rd session they served lunch.   

**Q:**  There were 4 midmorning sessions, right?   

**A:**  There were three midmorning sessions for the first day. For the 2nd and 3rd day, there were 2 midmorning sessions. But on the 4th day there were 3 midmorning sessions. And 3rd session they would make tsog [Tib. ཚོགས] offering on the last day.   

**Q:**  On the last day, there was one extra evening tea [Tib. དགོང་ཇ]?   

**A:**  There were two extra teas.   

**Q:**  When the nyerpa give the tonggo on the [Tib. གཉེར་པའ་དུས་བཟང] the two nyerpa would supply it together?   

**A:**  Yes, the nyerpa would hire people for helping them and they would chop the meat in a big pot.   

**Q:**  If the two nyerpa had shortage of money for supply what would they do?   

**A:**  When they gave the tonggo they had to add more money by themselves because the capital was not enough.   

**Q:**  In general, the capital was not enough for the rite?   

**A:**  They didn't have enough capital. For each nyerpa had 200-300 dotse.   

**Q:**  For example, the khamsten would select the nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Would the Khamsten collect the candidate for the nyerpa from the mitsen?   

**A:**  The khamsten nyerpa would take turn from among the 9 mitsen. From each mitsen 2 people would come.   

**Q:**  For example, the Hamdong Khamsten had 9 mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For example in this year two mitsen; Hor Mitsen and Tsokag Mitsen got to take the turn for the Khamsten nyerpa, would the two mitsen select nyerpa among the monks who is best from the Khamsten and they would appoint them?   

**A:**  From the mitsen they would confirm who is going to be the nyerpa.   

**Q:**  Would they select the monk from the mitsen, for being the nyerpa of the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The nyerpa of the khamtsen would take turn by the mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I was told that the turn for the nyerpa was different?   

**A:**  Yes, there were two lows; [Tib. གྲལ] one row is the Mongolian and the other row is Khampa row.   

**Q:**  The mitsen had the right to select the nyerpa for the khamtsen and the mitsen's nyerpa who reach the turn had to go to the khamtsen to be the nyerpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They didn't have the power to select the nyerpa?   

**A:**  The khamtsen didn't have the power.   

**Q:**  If one mitsen nyerpa would go to do the khamtsen's nyerpa, he had a future, right? Therefore, when they selected the nyerpa, did they have to give a gift to the mitsen in order to get the nyerpa position?   

**A:**  No, you don't need to give gift. The nyerpa was not selected from the pechawa   

**Q:**  The nyerpa should be done by the monks who are not pechawa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For example, I belonged to Hor Mitsen, and I am not pechawa and if I was appointed as nyerpa of khamtsen, did I have to offer money and khata to the mitsen?   

**A:**  I don't think you needed to offer the money to the mitsen.   

**Q:**  Is there anything they needed to request to the mitsen in order to become nyerpa?   

**A:**  I think he needed to request the tsondu that he want to be the nyerpa of the Hamdong Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  He just had to request the mitsen, but he didn't need to offer the gift?   

**A:**  No, he didn't need to give a gift. The mitsen's tsondu would prepare for the nyerpa of the khamtsen. I don't know much since I am a böpa. We didn't pay any attention on these things.   

**Q:**  Did the mitsen and khamtsen have a legal charter jayig [Tib. བཅའ་ཡིག]?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a Jayig.   

**Q:**  Who would keep the Jayig of the mitsen?   

**A:**  The mitsen Jayig would be kept by the nyerpa.   

**Q:**  What about the Jayig of khamtsen?   

**A:**  The two khamtsen gegen would keep the Jayig. But the tsondu had the power of operating the Jayig.   

**Q:**  In general, the two khamtsen gegen would keep the Jayig, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At the time of the changing nyerpa, they would read the Jayig on the tsondu. On the 15th of 10th month, at the time of first evening tea session, the new nyerpa would dress up and come to the tsondu and read the Jayig. There were not many nyerpa who could do that. There was a Jayig gegen who would read the Jayig and there was a system like the gegen which would give a loud speech on the tsondu [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ] how to obey discipline and about the conduct of the monks [Tib. སྒྲིག་ལམ་ཀུན་སྤྱོད].   

**Q:**  So the Jayig gegen would read the Jayig and give the speech regarding the behavior of the nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes, the two nyerpa had to come there.   

**Q:**  Jayig gegen would read the Jayig, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when he was reading the Jayig, the two nyerpa would sit side by side. He would read the Jayig in the center of the row. The nyerpa would have to go to find the Jayig gegen. After the Jayig gegen finished reading, the nyerpa would keep the Jayig. Probably, the new nyerpa would stay in one of the Hamdong Khamtsen's shag during the Nyerpa Düsang. In the shag the two nyerpa and the Jayig gegen would open the Jayig. They don't need to come to the assembly.   

**Q:**  In general, the nyerpa of the mitsen was like the gegö?   

**A:**  Yes, he was like the gegö.   

**Q:**  I was told that normally, the nyerpa would have to look after the discipline and he also had to sweep?   

**A:**  Yes, the nyerpa had to sweep.   

**Q:**  Where would he have to sweep?   

**A:**  He had to sweep in the Hor mitsen's assembly hall [Tib. ཚོམ་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  The Tsomchen means the normally where the monk hold the assembly right?   

**A:**  Yes, for the Hor Mitsen they had servants for the nyerpa called nyeryog [Tib. གཉེར་གཡོག] who would do the sweeping.   

**Q:**  The servant of the nyerpa had to stay in the mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes, he had to stay in the mitsen.   

**Q:**  Who would appoint the nyeryog? Was it the mitsen or the nyerpa?   

**A:**  I think the nyeryog would be appointed by the members of the tsondu. If the nyerpa would appoint the nyeryog then he would do it for one year. But he would do the Nyeryog for 3-4 years. The nyeryog had a little power and he will scold the monks in the assembly.   

**Q:**  The turn for the nyerpa was one year?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the nyeryog was also for one year term?   

**A:**  No, he won't finish his turn in one year.   

**Q:**  He would stay?   

**A:**  Yes, he would stay and I think the nyeryog was appointed by the tsondu. The reason why I don't know in detail about the mitsen was because I was not in the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, are there any monks who were in the tsondu?   

**A:**  I don't think so. Gendün Namgyal [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], the tratsang umdze became the umdze after me.   

**Q:**  You know Gyensten Jigme [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་འཇིག་མེ] did he belong to Hor Mitsen?   

**A:**  No, he was in Tsokag mitsen. There was Wöser Chönphel [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་འཕེལ] in Tsokag mitsen. Two of them were in Tsokag mitsen's tsondu member.   

**Q:**  What would happen if a poor monk came to his turn for the nyerpa and he had to spend the money?   

**A:**  Yes, if the monk who is poor and who don't have a gegen, we might think that how could he be able to be the nyerpa, but anyway, he could manage it. Some of the poor monks would do better than the monks who were rich.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by giving the tonggo? For example, the Nyerpai Dusang was also called tonggo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In general, the word tonggo was for the tea served in the assembly mangja [Tib. མང་ཇ] and the alms, right?   

**A:**  They would call it tonggo, but mainly, the word tonggo means rice gruel. And if there was rice gruel all the monks would say that today there was tonggo.   

**Q:**  Did they say, today there was a tonggo if there was an alms?   

**A:**  No, they won't call it tonggo if there were alms . They would say to there was gye [Tib. འགྱེད].   

**Q:**  For example, in those days it was said that the Cultural [Department], Rigshung [Tib. རིག་གཞུང] should take the responsibility of the tonggo on 10th and 25th of the Tibetan month [Tib. ཚེས་བཅུ་ཉེར་ལྔ] 8th, 15th, and 30th of Tibetan month [Tib. ཉ་སྟོང་བརྒྱད་གསུམ] This was called the permanent, tag, [Tib. རྟག] tonggo?   

**A:**  Yes, it was like this. In the past, Drepung didn't hold the [Tib. ཚེས་བཅུ]. In the past, it was not allowed to hold tsog on 10th and 25th as these are [holy days] of Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ]. They could do it in their shag, but not in the assembly.   

**Q:**  So [Tib. ཚེས་བཅུ་ཉེར་ལྔ ] is new for the Drepung?   

**A:**  Yes, in the past, in Drepung they have the gelong's confessional assembly, Sojong [Tib. གསོ་སྦྱོང].   

**Q:**  I was told that there was no system for the umdze of Ngagba [Tib. སྔགས་པ] to be the tsogchen umdze?   

**A:**  It was not really that there wasn't this kind of thing.   

**Q:**  The umdze of the Ngagpa didn't know the voice called dzoke, [Tib. མཛོ་སྐད], right?   

**A:**  Yes, the umdze of the Ngagpa didn't know the dzoke. The umdze of Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང] may or may not know both. The tsogjen umze must know the dzoke as he must be the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] umze.   

**Q:**  When you started the prayer how many kind of voices were there?   

**A:**  There were two kinds of voices one was the natural voice [Tib. རང་སྐད] and the other was the dzoke. And in Sera, the dzoke was called made up voice, Jöke [Tib. བཅོས་སྐད].   

**Q:**  So in Drepung they called it dzoke and in Sera they called it Jöke?   

**A:**  Yes, the umdze of Ngagpa was using his natural voice.   

**Q:**  The umdze learned dzoke later?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  People were saying that according to tradition, the umdze of Ngapa won't do the umdze in Mönlam Festival?   

**A:**  The Ngagpa didn't need to join the Mönlam. The monks of Ngapa would hold their separate assembly in Ngakhang [Tib. སྔགས་ཁང]. The exorcism [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག] of Mönlam should be done by the Namgyal [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] Tratsang and the Ngagpa. In the old society, the tsogchen umdze could be done by the monks who had a good voice whether in Lama Gyüpa or others since they got the approval from the Dalai Lama. The Mönlam umdze didn't have to come from Drepung.   

**Q:**  So any one can do the Mönlam Umdze?   

**A:**  The monks who had good voice and got the approval from the Dalai Lama could do it. In the past, we didn't do the tsogchen umdze but there was a monk bodyguard of the Dalai Lama Simgag [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག] who was the tsogchen umdze and he had a very good voice, he was very famous. There was tratsang umdze in replace of me who didn't know the dzoke.   

**Q:**  Why didn't he know the dzoke?   

**A:**  Because our tratsang didn't need the dzoke and we use our own natural voice. We used the natural voice for the prayer chanting with long tones [Tib. འདོན་རྟ་དབྱངས]. But they would use dzoke for praying in tsogchen.   

**Q:**  If you get selected for the tsogchen umdze then you should learn the dzoke?   

**A:**  Yes, you should learn the dzoke. I did the tratsang umdze for 9 years. After two years after I became umdze, I learned dzoke.   

**Q:**  Do you need to find a gegen to learn the dzoke?   

**A:**  No, you didn't need a gegen. Everyday, I practiced the dzoke and finally the right sound came out. I practiced dzoke by my own. In 1980 I went for a pilgrimage to the Gemphel Utse [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་དབུ་རྩེ] in Drepung and I met the Ngagpa umdze and he told me to come to Drepung I will get you in. But, I didn't go because I thought that I was expelled, so how could I go back. Actually, I was capable for being an umdze. I forgot a little bit, but I learned when I was child so I can learn it again and it is not hard. We didn't do any tantric ritual [Tib. སྔགས་ཆོག]. But in the Jokhang we had to do the tantric ritual and I taught them since I came here. In the Jokhang they are doing the rituals on the 10th and the 25th [Tib. tses bcu nyer lnag].   

**Q:**  In the Jokhang they had the [rituals of] all the Buddhist sects?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Today there was a big assembly and there were many monks. I don't know why?   

**A:**  I think there are some other monks and we didn't start the assembly yet. Since I came here I taught them how to do the ritual. I have 10 pupil to which I taught tantric ritual. While I was ill they took turn for the umdze.   

**Q:**  They were skillful in chanting prayers [Tib. འདོན་བཟང]?   

**A:**  Yes, when they were taking turns it was very good. There were different pupils between the old society and now. In the past, when you reach the turn for the umdze, then that monk would be very attentive on prayers. Nowadays they are not attentive and they are like just working for the tax.   

**Q:**  In the past, did you mean the monks were attentive on clothes or they were attentive on learning?   

**A:**  They would study very hard and they were thinking that I will study hard to be the umdze. Nowadays they are not attentive on learning because umdze is only for starting prayers. They don't have the privilege like the old society.   

**Q:**  In the past, the umdze had a good privilege?   

**A:**  Yes, umdze had a good privilege. All of the money for requesting to lead the prayer, dönkül, [Tib. འདོན་སྐུལ] goes to the umdze. Nowadays, the money for requesting prayer goes to common monks.   

**Q:**  The money for the dönkül goes to umdze and the money or the clothes offered for dedication for the deceased, the Ngöten [Tib. བསྔོ་རྟེན] goes where?   

**A:**  The Ngöten goes to the Lamas and abbots.   

**Q:**  The money for dönkül goes to umdze?   

**A:**  In the past, the money for dönkül [during the Mönlam] goes to umdze but not now. I think in the monastery the money for dönkül goes to umdze.   

**Q:**  Last time, they told me that the money for dönkül and ngöten went to individuals and they didn't double their alms shares [for the umdze]?   

**A:**  That's right.   

**Q:**  When you say the money goes to the individual, do you mean the money for dönkül goes to umdze and the ngöten goes to Lama and abbot?   

**A:**  Yes that's right.   

**Q:**  They didn't offer it to the gegö?   

**A:**  No, but nowadays they might offer it to the gegö. I am not so sure. The money for dönkül went only to the umdze. The assembly wouldn't be able to do the prayer in the request list. Because after the tea was served in assembly then they won't do the prayer. In the assembly the umdze would read the name of prayers while monks were drinking tea. Reading the name of the prayer is considered as good as reciting the prayer.   

**Q:**  For example, you had to be the grain nyerpa, drunyer, [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར]?   

**A:**  Yes, I had to be the grain nyerpa.   

**Q:**  When you did the grain nyerpa, you had to supply 5 khe of tsamba for making tsog offering and I heard later they increased this, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you had to offer the tsamba for making tshog, tsogtsam [Tib. ཚོགས་རྩམ]. Later, the grain nyerpa added 4 fried cookies, kabse [Tib. ཁ་ཟས] for each monk.   

**Q:**  You had to mill the 5 khe of tsamba and bring it to the mitsen, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I had to bring the tsamba.   

**Q:**  It is quite light?   

**A:**  Yes, it is light.   

**Q:**  Later, they changed it into cookies?   

**A:**  At first, the grain nyerpa offered 4 cookies and after that it went up to 10-12 cookies for each monk. After you finished three years term for grain nyerpa and you would get a few khe of grain as for your salary, [Tib. རྒྱབ་གླ] during three years term and you would leave your salary as for the capital for the next nyerpa.   

**Q:**  When you were working as a grain nyerpa you got the salary, right?   

**A:**  There was not much salary. There were 4-5 khe of grain.   

**Q:**  The nyerpa would leave the salary here?   

**A:**  Yes, because there was no capital for the cookies so they will leave the grain salary as for capital for making cookies. That's how it was. This was all done voluntarily. Nobody forced them to do that.   

**Q:**  As for the relationship between the great monastic seats, densa, [Tib. གདན་ས] and the branch monastery [Tib. གཞིས་དགོན]. For example, the Drepung Monastery had many branch monasteries, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the abbots for the branch monastery should be sent from the great monastic seats, right?   

**A:**  They didn't need to send many of them from the great monastic seats. The Gomang had to send an abbot to the branch monastery called Chamling [Tib. བྱམས་གླིང] Monastery. They would send one geshe for the abbot and the chandzö, Lama's servant Söpön [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] and a servant. Altogether, there were five monks. The Gomang also had to sent one Geshe as the abbot and one chandzö and a söpön to the branch monastery called Kongpo Tashi Rabten [Tib. ཀོང་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་རབ་བརྟན]. This monastery belonged to Gomang Tratsang. The reincarnated Lama Terab Trüku [Tib. བཀྲས་རབ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] of that monastery belonged to Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང]. The tratsang kept all their salary and alms while they were out to the branch monastery.   

**Q:**  What about the abbot?   

**A:**  The abbot would be sent from the Gomang. The tratsang had relation with Kyormolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོལུང] because it also belonged to the Gomang. But the tratsang didn't need to send the abbot.   

**Q:**  Beside the two branch monasteries of the Gomang, all the abbots of the branch monasteries would be selected among the monks in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they sent a Geshe as the abbot to the branch monasteries, how many years did they have to stay?   

**A:**  It was 5-6 years terms and not more than that.   

**Q:**  When the abbot finished his turn in the branch monastery, did the branch monastery need to offer something to the tratsang as a gift?   

**A:**  When the abbot came back he had to give a tonggo called [Tib. ཐོན] to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Were there anything that the branch monastery should offer to the tratsang for expressing gratitude?   

**A:**  No, the branch monastery didn't need to offer anything.   

**Q:**  The reason why the abbot would give the tonggo to tratsang was because he got the alms in the tratsang while he was out and he also got the alms from the branch monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, he also got the rank of abbot. Before that, he used to be an ordinary monk.   

**Q:**  After being an abbot in the branch monastery, when he came back would his rank remain as an abbot?   

**A:**  No, he won't get the rank of abbot but he would get the rank of tratsang chöndze.   

**Q:**  So the monk who was sent as an abbot to the branch monastery when he came back he would get the rank of tratsang chöndze and he had to offer the assembly tea, tracha [Tib. graw ja]?   

**A:**  He had to serve tea and give alms. For example, when you finished the term of gegö in the monastery, the shengo have to supply the tonggo and serve tea and rice gruel and give alms. When you finished the term of tratsang umdze, you don't need to give the tonggo but you have give alms. Then you were allowed to wear the brocade vest [Tib. གོས་ཆེན་སྟོད་འགག].   

**Q:**  When they sent the abbot to the branch monastery, from the Gomang Tratsang would they decide the 4 monks going with the abbot or could the abbot choose the monks?   

**A:**  From the tratsang, they would decide who was going to be sent with the abbot; the chandzö, the nyerpa and the Söpön. This was the same way like they sent monks to the long distance to collect donation büdü [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] where they would send a Lama, ritual helper [Tib. ཆོས་རོགས], nyerpa and they would take servant by themselves. When the büdü came back, if they did well then the Lama would get Lama's rank and the chandzö will get the rank of tratsang chöndze. The nyerpa would get the rank of gegö and they didn't have to give the tonggo.   

**Q:**  If the monk came to get the admission to Drepung from a branch monastery he would not be considered as newly admission, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he wouldn't be considered as a newly admitted and he would be considered as tragyün.   

**Q:**  In what class would they put him in?   

**A:**  He would have to start from the praying and chanting class döndönchög [Tib. འདོན་འདོན་ཆོག].   

**Q:**  He had to find a gegen by himself or the khamtsen would deal with this?   

**A:**  He had to find a gegen by himself.   

**Q:**  He couldn't ask the khamtsen gegen to find a gegen?   

**A:**  No, you had to find a gegen by yourself.   

**Q:**  If you were a tragyün then you had to ask the khamtsen gegen to find a gegen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If the monks came from a branch monastery then he had to find the gegen by himself?   

**A:**  Yes, you had to find the gegen by yourself.   

**Q:**  He won't belong to the newly admitted monk, right?   

**A:**  That's right. If the monk was very young then he would belong to the newly admitted.   

**Q:**  As for the monks who came from the branch monastery, would they go the khamtsen where they belonged to?   

**A:**  Yes, they had to come to the khamtsen where they belonged to.   

**Q:**  Damshung [Tib. འདམ, གཞུང] was not included in Hor Mitsen?   

**A:**  Damshung was not included in the Hor Mitsen.   

**Q:**  Beside the Damshung all the people from the north, Hor belonged to Hor Mitsen?   

**A:**  In the charter it was written all the names of the places in Hor.   

**Q:**  The places like Nagchu [Tib. ནག་ཆུ], Bachen [Tib. སྦྲ་ཆེན] and Sok [Tib. སོག] belonged to Hor Mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes and also there were Dzama Adra [Tib. རྫ་དམར་ཨ་བྲ], Amdo Tömai [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་སྟོད་སྨད].   

**Q:**  The Sog Dzong and Biru[Tib. འབྲི་རུ] Dzong also belonged to Hor?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  All the Nagchu area belonged to Hor?   

**A:**  Yes, there were places in Tö [Tib. སྟོད] called Nagtsang, [Tib. ནག་ཚང] also belonged to Hor Mitsen and Tsenpo [Tib. བཙན་པོ] Mitsen.   

**Q:**  Some of them belonged to Tsenpo Motsen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tsenpo Mitsen belonged to the Mongolian?   

**A:**  No, it belonged to Amdo.   

**Q:**  When we say böpa, it included the area of the near Lhasa, all the Tsangpa [Tib. གཙང་པ] and all the Lhoka [Tib. ལྷོ་ཁ], but Konpo was not included. All the places in Tsang [Tib. གཙང], Drigung [Tib. འབྲི་གུང] Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང], Chushü [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར], Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ] and the places near Lhasa are belonged to the böpa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Kongpo was not included in the böpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The places like Sangri [Tib. ཟངས་རི] and Nyemai [Tib. གཉལ་སྨད] all belonged to böpa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The people from Tö was different from böpa?   

**A:**  Yes, the Töpa belonged to Ladhak. In Loseling there was Pitug [Tib. pi tug??] Khamtsen and in the Gomang there was the Ngari [Tib. མངའ་རིས] Khamtsen. All of the monks from Ngari belonged to Ngari Khamtsen.   

