# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Within this interview are discussions of returning land that the jiso parceled out due to bribes received and how he was affected by these issues. Also he discusses his return from being imprisonment in jail the work done to maintain his livelihood. Also mentioned are the living conditions of his family and how they survived by pooling their resources with another family to build homes. Finally, there is an account of Gomang and the umzde's involvement as well as a discussion of the Khamtsen gegen.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_06/M_0001_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  When I was about 25, the jiso and the rigji [Tib. རིགས་སྤྱི] did a investigation on land, sashib [Tib. ས་ཞིབ].   

**Q:**  What did they actual do in the sashib?   

**A:**  It was to attack the farmers and investigate the lands and as a result of this, they found some had more lands and some had less. In fact the farmers were really hard. I was a farmer, but I didn't know about the situation, but after the revolution, I was imprisoned and then I stayed at home and became a farmer. If we really became a good farmer and worked hard, it is okay. ]] My family members were miser of Kyomolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང]. After I left prison, I went to my household and they had 58 khe of land. I said at this time, I didn't want any land, my family has a lot of land so I said that I don't want more land. I worked hard on this and got a good yield. I had to sell 170 khe of grain as selling grain [Tib. སྤུས་ཚོང] [got a little money]. The donation grain [Tib. རྒྱལ་གཅེས་གཞུང་འབྲུ] was little less than 40 khe [no money for this] [the market price was 15 yuan for 1 khe of grain]. And then when I left the seed, I could barely manage my livelihood, but when they set up the rukhag, we became real beggars. We had to give all our farming equipment and animals to the rukhag. I had two big dzo, I paid 80 khe of grain for one dzo and paid 30 of grain for the other one. I also had 3 horses and 2 baby mules. They only paid me 60 yuan for each baby mule. They paid 100 yuan for each dzo. After the rukhag started we were left as individual household [Tib. ཁེར་རྐྱང་དུད་ཚང].   

**Q:**  At that time, the trerim were left as individuals, right?   

**Q:**  My home was a trerim and I could stay as same as my home. When I first came out, they made the decision in the monastery and I was told, "From now on, you have the political right [Tib. སྲིད་དབང] and the people who regard you as a reactionary, they are wrong."   

**Q:**  So they didn't label you, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And they returned me home. I was a religious worker [Tib. ཆོས་ལས་པ] and nobody said anything about me being a tratsang umdze. One of my household's magpa was a uyön of the Farmer's Association [Tib. ཞིང་པ་མཐུན་ཚོགས]. In 1961 I was let out of jail after the decision was made in Drepung. From 1961-66 I stayed home and I could help my home quite well on doing the farming. In 1966, there was the Three Great Education [Tib. slop bso chen mo gsum] movement was held.   

**Q:**  Before that, did you get any chance of performing rituals?   

**A:**  Not at all.   

**Q:**  Did you do some at home?   

**A:**  Yes a little bit. In the Three Great Education, they investigated in detail. In my family, my mother had only one child, me. The rest of the children were in the household who are the children of my maternal aunt. She had 3 daughters. The youngest is in a different home. At the time of the Three Great Education, the youngest one said that she was a servant in our household when she was young. But really we all were relatives from the same parents and ate the same food. But she accused us at this time. When I returned in 1961 the household was very poor. They only had one chupa and a woolen boot with leather sole for the 4 daughters to wear outside which they would wear by turns. The land was good, but they couldn't handle it. They only had a very weak ox which they would beat and it was even bleeding a little bit on his back. And the land was full of cocongrass. One of the daughters of my maternal aunt had left for Nyero [Tib. ཉེ་རོ]. I heard that usually, she would throw the seeds in the land. So there was nobody throwing the seed. Then our neighbor who was related to us was also kind of ridiculing us saying, "Now who is going to throw the seed?" I said I will throw the seed because I am from this household. And my family members said that I can't do that, but I said that I will do it as an experiment and asked them usually how much seed do you use for the field and they said that they use one khe and five dre if you throw little big thick and use one khe if you throw it little thiner. Then I planted a field by throwing the seed little bit thin and they said that I have used one khe of seed. When I asked whether it is okay, they said it is okay. In that year, there was a heavy rain fall on beginning of summer, so the yield was excellent. When I was throwing seed the people were watching me because in that area, only the adult women throw the seeds.   

**Q:**  How many times of yield did you get?   

**A:**  I got 9 times yield [Tib. དགུ་སྐོར] and I got little less than 1,000 khe from 58 khe of land because it was a good harvest.   

**Q:**  In 1962, did you have the same amount of land that you had in 1958?   

**A:**  I had the same amount of khe of land that I had before the uprising in 1959.   

**Q:**  In the past, to whom did your household was belong to?   

**A:**  We were miser of Kyomolung Tratsang [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང]. We had one tregang for which we had to provide one ula everyday during the whole year. This was the inner tax, nangtre [Tib. ནང་ཁྲལ]. We had 4 khe and 10 tre of land which was given from the upper part of valley along with the house.   

**Q:**  Did you have to work for the chitre for the dewashung?   

**A:**  No. We also had an additional land given by Kyormolung Monastery based on lease for which we had to give 75 on lease.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pay taxes in kind like wool etc?   

**A:**  No. Historically, Taktra Rimpoche was born in our household and we had a shiga called Trongjung [Tib. གྲོང་ཆུང] Shiga. The shiga had a protective deity who was dressed in a lay official dress. In the past, the household was okay but after Taktra was born, the family became very poor and they gave the shiga to Kyomolung Tratsang and they told the tratsang to give them a house for the lama's parents to stay and they gave the house called gangkyi [Tib. སྒང་སྐྱིད], for which we didn't to pay any taxes. In the early times, there was a special government tax called barley tax [Tib. འབྲུ་འཕྱགས] but we didn't even have to pay this and the monastery paid it. We had a document to this effect. Whatever we planted like wheat, barley, etc, on the day for paying the lease, we had to pay 75 of barley to the monastery. And now it has become two households and we had to pay 150 khe. We had to clean the barley and put them in new sacks [Tib. སྒྱེ་མོ] and they also put new ropes for hanging the bell on the necks of the pack donkeys. Then the monks would come where the barley is kept carrying their sacks and it was directly given to the monks and the monastery; this is very good and also gave us a khata and rice.   

**Q:**  When you pay 75 khe for the lease, what was the actual yield you get at the time? How many khe of land did you plant?   

**A:**  We plant about 54 khe of land. I don't think we had a good yield at that time. In the 3rd, 4th and the 5th month, the tsampa would run out. And they would owe a lot of loan, so I asked them "How did that happen? If you do well the farming, it should be okay." But they didn't do the farming well. Us two families built a house and at this time, Kyomolung monks said you must have large profit from this land on lease and are getting a lot of yield, so the chandzö thought this was very profitable land and took the lease land back. We were made to move to the land in the upper part of the valley. Our lease land was leased out to another household for about three years at a higher rate (raised from 150 to 500).   

**Q:**  At that time, you couldn't refuse it saying that we had the pledge, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They had taken back the pledge and didn't give it back.   

**Q:**  When did they take back the land?   

**A:**  Probably around 1945 when the Taktra's regency was over.   

**Q:**  Then it is in 1950. If the Taktra's term was not over, it should not have happened like this. The other household who took the land paid 500 khe of barley and planted it for 3 years, but since the land was not good, they made no profit, so then stopped planting it. The reason for taking it back was that we built the new house, but we first asked the monks to come and see the old house which was falling apart to see why we felt we had no choice but to build a new one. We bought the beams and pillars from the monastery, but we couldn't pay, so we asked them to make it into a loan agreement. At this time, each beam and pillar was 1.5 sang. We built a house with 3 pillars upstairs and 3 pillars downstairs with a small courtyard. [The land was lost probably just after he became umdze]. When I got out of prison, my family was very kind in taking me in even though I was a trerim and also letting me take down the 2nd story and using the wood to build a new one story house for myself. In the old society this household and I were separate in eating food and spending money. If they came to Drepung I would invite them to the shag and give tea, but that's all. We weren't that close. I became a trerim, the ngatsab in Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] in the Three Great Education time. At that time, in the Work Team [Tib. ལས་དོན་ཚོགས་ཆུང], there was a great Muslim woman called Dzelahai. I went to her and said, "I am a trerim and I am going to be separate from my family." She said, "If you and your home had a fight you can split, if its just because you are trerim, it is not okay to be separate. So I didn't have to get split with them. Then the Three Great Education was over and they held summary [Tib. མཇུག་སྡོམ] meeting and the cadre also said that you don't need to be separate from the household if the household agrees to live together. This was very helpful for me. In 1966, when they set up the rukhag, we and our neighbor weren't allowed to join in the rukhag until 1969. We were able to plant and get good yields and the animals were also there and we had a pair of plowing dzo and the other household also had one. Near to us, there was a State Farm belonged to Rinpung [Tib. རིན་སྤུང] where the rukhag would go to plow their fields and when the rukhag didn't have enough plowing animals, they hired us for 3 yuan per day plus food for plowing their fields with horses. We were doing okay and then in 1968, since our condition was quite good the trerim households were also put into the rukhag as members, but not me. I was given few fields and divided the fertilizers and I was kept separate. At that time, I thought that even though I was left separated, I could do the farming. So I went to the xiang and told the xiang zhang how they made me to stay separate and how they divided the land and I asked whether this was the decision from the xiang. The xiang zhang said that he didn't know anything abut this and he told me to you go home. That night, the rukhag dütrang held a meeting and the xiang zhang asked the dütrang, "Who gave you permission to do this? It is not okay to do that." So that year I stayed separate but then I asked them whether I should stay separate or I can stay with my family and then I was allowed to rejoin my family. On the next day, when my family joined the rukhag I was also told that I can join the rukhag, but I suffered a great loss which was not amicable with the policy. They told me, "You don't have animals, so you have to work in the xiang which is without payment" [laughter] and I had to work 100 days in a year for three years without getting paid because I was a trerim. I also didn't get the work point grain [Tib. སྐར་འབྲུ]. And then I was also called to the county.   

**Q:**  Mostly, what would you have to do during that time?   

**Q:**  In the xiang, I had to work on planting trees and they made us to work on the constructions like demolishing the Ramoche Temple in Kyomolung and all the earth and stones were carried out. The inner walls were built with pounded earth [Tib. གྱང] and the outter wall of the temple where people go for circumambulation was buit by stone. I was made to build the Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] Xiang. Then they made us to build a vermicelli factory [Ch. fen chang] and they produced vermicelli. We also built a very big pig pen near Taglungdra where the place was made like a State Farm. And we also built houses for the people to stay in. After I was called to the county, I got some benefit from the work point. Though I was paid the daily wages 1 yuan, 7 maotse and the 5 fen, when I had to hand it over to the rukhag, I got the highest work point in the rukhag. In the years 1981, 1982, they made me to do the unpaid work ad I told some people but it didn't help.   

**Q:**  In the old society when you worked as an ula, did you get food?   

**A:**  No. We have to take everything like food and clothes. It was a tax. I tried to recollect about the accounting of Gomang, but since I don't have anything to tell you about the amount of the endowment and the amount of the interest we got. So I can't tell you clearly. Anyway, for example, in one month, if we had bought like 5 boxes of brick tea and 2 loads of tea balls, we would deduct the money from the account and write in the expenditure list [Tib. སོང་ཁྲ] and add up the tea in the account and write it in the list of receiving things [Tib. བྱུང་ཁྲ]. In the following months, when we use whatever amount of tea bricks, it will be written in the list iof the expenditures. That's the way the accounts were done. There was no detailed accounting with receipts. They just checked over whatever was written in the books by the clerk.   

**Q:**  How would you do the 6 months accounting?   

**A:**  At the 6 month's accounting, we would add up the monthly income and expenditure and the amount of leftover for each month and we would get the totals and we did the same when we do the annual accounting. I became umdze at 28 years old, so I was young. I don't remember much of this. When I was 37 years old the revolt began. I was expelled when I was 36. I stayed at home from 39-65. From when I was 65, I came to Jokhang in 1988.   

**Q:**  Who brings the accounts? Was it the nyertsang?   

**A:**  The nyertsang is separate. The accounting is done by the tratsang. The clerk reads the accounts.   

**Q:**  Who would use the diu?   

**A:**  The diu was mainly used by the clerk and sometimes I also did that.   

**Q:**  Who would check whether the diu is done correctly or not?   

**A:**  We would do that and all the chabu should come there. Sometimes, one person read the account and two people use the diu and later we also used the abacus when one of the Samlo Drepa called Nagtshang Tenphel la [Tib. ནག་ཚང་བསྟན་འཕེལ་ལགས] who was good in using the abacus. After that, there was a clerk who is a mixbreed of Tibetan and Nepalese who lived in Ramoche [Tib. ར་མོ་ཆེ]. He brought math like adding up and subtracting and division. Our accounting is for the chabu not for the nyertsang who was separate in giving tonggo and paying salaries. After the chöra was over, the monks would recite a prayer and then they come to the tratsang and the uchö would check whether the necessary salary was completely brought or not and they put a seal on it and the person who brought the salary would also put a seal on it.   

**Q:**  Who does the accounting for the ngünyer?   

**A:**  The chabu do it.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us more about your law case in the Branch Judicial System where the Disputes were Settled, Gyöship [Tib. gyod zhip]. How did it come about?   

**A:**  The case was sued by the representative of the mass monks. Before that, we were doing the accounting on those things carefully. The discussion had been going on for some time among monks when the representative complained to the chabu that our monks' livelihood is poor. So please think about helping the monk's livelihood.   

**Q:**  To whom did the monks tell that?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they came to the tratsang and since they said all the things that were not acceptable [Tib. རྣ་བར་མ་འགྲོ་བ], we didn't heed to them because their spear head [Tib. མདུང་རྩེ] was pointed towards the chabu. Then they reported the Gyöship. So the Gyöship did the investigation.   

**A:**  After how many months did they report the Gyöship after they first told the tratsang?   

**A:**  Maybe 5-6 months or a year passed and then the representative of the monks went to the Gyöship Office to petition for action.   

**Q:**  Then the Gyöship Office sent a notice and called you to the Gyöship Office, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who else were there when you were called there?   

**A:**  All the chabu were there and there was one clerk who was capable and they checked all the accounts in the Gyöship Office located on the Tsuglagang. The gegö, umdze also went there.   

**Q:**  Did the representative of the monks have to go there? And who were them?   

**A:**  Yes. The representative of the monks were the Amdo Chabey Tsütrim [Tib. ? tshul khrims].   

**Q:**  Is he still alive in Drepung?   

**A:**  I don't think so. He was quite old then and then there was Drala Gombo,[Tib. དགྲ་ལྷ་མགོན་པོ] from Chabra khamtsen's [Tib. ? ]. These two were the main ones and both of them were old and might be dead. But when they checked the accounts, there was nothing wrong, so in the end, the representative of the monks had to give us each a khata due to the order of Gyöship Office and in the end, we won the dispute. [laughter] They came to my shag to give me the khata, but I returned the khata back. That was kind of chaotic sitiation.   

**Q:**  At that time, there weren't anything like back door relation?   

**A:**  Not at all because this was really complicated case and the accounting started from the Water Horse Year.   

**Q:**  Did you do the accounting according to the book or did you have receipts or chabu's signature for buying things like tea leaves etc?   

**A:**  We didn't have receipts and signatures at all.   

**Q:**  So there was the way of telling lies saying you paid more than you actually paid and they won't know if you put some expenses that was spent before 3-4 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Later, I became the accountant of a construction contract brigade [Ch. bao gong dui] and since all the receipts were in Chinese I had a lot of problem, because I don't know Chinese and had to ask people to read it. Anyway, we could make 500 yuan per month out of the wages.   

**Q:**  How much wages do you get?   

**A:**  Just before the rukhag [Ch. gong she] was dispersed we get 1 yuan and 7 maotse per day. After the rukhag was dispersed they increased the wages and best was paid 3 yuan and in addtion, they would put 3 days wages for the over time whether we actually did it not. If we worked hard we would earn about 500 yuan per month. At that time, I was the person we make other people to work, so I had to offend others verbally and the worse was the carpenters and I would tell them, "We were all paid the same wages and you people take away gums, nails, glasses, etc, but we all ran out our wages at the same time. So what happened? If you don't work and learn the skill, you will suffer the loss in the future. Do not steal. The more you steal, you become courageous and then you will become useless."   

**Q:**  Tell me about Hamdong's Khamtsen structure. When the tragyun came, did they have to work other than the shöndre like the khamtsen gegen by turns?   

**A:**  There were the tragyün from Mongolia, Amdo, Kham and Hor and these were the ones who do khamtsen gegen. We don't have to do it.   

**Q:**  Did they have to do other jobs like nyerpa?   

**A:**  No. After they finish doing the khamtsen gegen, they would become the khamtsen chandzö and then become tsondu members who had the authority on the works done in the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Is the khamtsen gegen done by turns?   

**A:**  Yes, by turns. [It actually goes by turns to the 9 mitsen, it seems] First they become khamtsen gegen, then the chandzö, then tsondu. If you are very capable then you can become the Hamdong Drepa [Tib. འགྲེས་པ].   

**Q:**  If your turn comes and you don't want to do khamtsen gegen, can you pay money to avoid doing it?   

**A:**  There might be. In the Hor Mitsen first you have to be the nyerpa, but in Hamdong khamtsen, if you were a böba and if you pay 25 sang, then you don't have to do any work. Later, this was increased to 75 sang, then it increased to 150 sang and at revolt it was 5 dotse. They also have to give a admission tea [Tib. ཞུགས་ཇ] and the böba also have to become a grain steward though there was not much grain. In the misten, there were many tsomja and there were the 2 joint ngüner and the 3 joint ngüner which were done by the geshe in the Hor Misten, but they didn't need to be the nyerpa. And when their time to become nyerpa comes, they would become the tsondu members. The monks who don't study pecha have to be the nyerpa. Consequently, in Hor Mitsen there were many pechawa because the nyerpa job is difficult. They have to give whole day tsomja to over 400 monks and they give tea 4x a day. Hor Misten has good geshe and good tratsang dönsanga. In one year, the nyerpa have to give 4 all day tsomja in Hor Mitsen. On this one day, we have 5 tshog. And on the final day, there are 6-7-8 tsog in one day. For the first morning tshog there is 2 tea and On the 2nd tsog, there is 2 teas and Thashi [Tib. ཐ་ཞི] (rice mix with minced meat); on the 3rd tsog, there are 2 teas and rice; on the 4th tsog at night two teas and 2 thukpa, then on the 5th evening tea, Gongja [Tib. དགོང་ཇ], there are 2 tea though the tea is not that good. At this time, if there is a geshe or chöndze who give the donggo, they become the sponsor of the nyerpa and the nyerpa doesn't have to do it.   

**Q:**  Where does the nyerpa's income come from?   

**A:**  They don't have much. They had a little bit endowment [Tib. མ་རྩ].   

**Q:**  Did they have chöshi?   

**A:**  No. They just have the endowment like 200-300 dotse. The interest from this is used for this tsomja. It is a one year job and there were 2 nyerpa. Once it is finished, the person joins the mitsen tsondu.   

**Q:**  Is there a mitsen gegen?   

**A:**  No. The in charge of discipline was also nyerpa when there was tsog.   

**Q:**  Do the böpa have to do the Hor Mitsen's grain steward?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Are they under the nyerpa?   

**A:**  No, they are separate. They have a small grain store room in Tragü [Tib. བྲག་ཁུད] in Nangtse [Tib. སྣང་རྩེ] Shiga. [it's nearby].   

**Q:**  Did you do the grain nyerpa?   

**A:**  No, I didn't have to do it because I was umdze. Otherwise, all have to do it even the chöndze. The grain nyerpa is a 3-year term.   

**Q:**  How many grain nyerpa are there?   

**A:**  There are three at one time for three years. They didn't have much grain. Their main work in the mitsen is to make the losar cookie probably from the interest from the grain loan, but I don't know for sure. There was a wage but I don't know what it was. Probably, they had one khe for the autumn and the spring.   

**Q:**  Are there any other works before being the Khamtsne gegen of Hamdong?   

**A:**  There is no other work that should be done before becoming the khamtsen gegen. The Hamdong Khamtsen Jama has to be done by böpa. Therefore, jama is said to be the representative of böpa. At the time of the Hamdong Khamtsen tsondu, the jama would sit near the door and no one else is allowed to go into the tsondu. If one need to say something to the tsondu, the 2 chandzö would come to the door and listen to them and take a khata from them and then report the tsondu. After that, they report the tsondu what the person said. They do that like the kadrung do in the Kashag. But there is a nyungjai jama [Tib. ཉུང་ཇའི་ཇ་མ] and nangsen who are like workers making tea and serving. These two wear a special kind of narrow red shawl called Trunsen [Tib. དྲུང་ཟན] which is also worn by the clerks who had the honorary rank, trungtog [Tib. དྲུང་གཏོགས] When the tsondu meets, there are two rows; one of the Mongolian and one of the Khamba. If the Hamdong dreba sit in the Mongolian row one year then the next year he sits in the Khamba row. Regularly,they put a red cushion and when there is the meeting they would put a square cushion on it. When they start the tsondu, the nangsen usually brings a big bowl of tsamba and each member puts out his tsamba and then the Hamdong dreba calls out to bring the tea and the chandzö yells loudly "tea" [Tib. གསོལ་ཇ] and then the nyungjai jama would yell, "okay" [Tib. ལགས་ལེ་སི]. The Hamdong and Samlo gegen are part of the laji meetings.   

