# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.11 : Tape 11  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 13 May 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 This tape talks about the number mitsen in each khamtsen in Drepung. It also discussed the 14 tsondu, and how new monks join the monastery.   

---  
### Tape 11  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_11/M_0001_11.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How many mitsen are there under Hamdong, [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] and Samlo, [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ] ?   

**A:**  Hamdong had 9 mitsen, but in Washu [Tib.?] Misten there were three mitsen merged together. Then there were: Hor Mitsen, Tsokha [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ] Mitsen, Jüchö [Tib. འཇུ་ཆོས] Mitsen, Tsenpo, [Tib. བཙན་པོ] and there was Jangya [Tib. ལྕང་སྐྱ] Mitsen which is also called Gunglung [Tib. གུང་ལུང] Mitsen. This is the mitsen of Jankya Rolpey Dorje [Tib. ལྕང་སྐྱ་རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ] and this goes to both Samlo and Hamdong then there is Thorgö [Tib. ཐོར་རྒོད] Mitsen.   

**Q:**  Does Tsenpo Mitsen goes to both Samlo and Hamdong?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How about Lamba, [Tib. ལམ་པ]?   

**A:**  Lamba mitsen I think is under Samlo but I'm not perfectly sure. Tölung Lampa [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་ལམ་པ] is belonged to this mitsen. There were two böbashung in Gomang and one in Loseling which neither belonged to Hamdong nor Samlo and in Gomang they have the Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] Mitsen and böbashung and the shengo goes only from these two mitsen. Then Thorgö Mitsen is consisted of Mongolians and was belonged to Hamdong.   

**Q:**  Was this Inner or Outter Mongolian?   

**A:**  It is Inner Mongolian.   

**Q:**  Was there any belonged to Hor Misten other than the people from the north, Horpa [Tib. ཧོར་པ]?   

**A:**  Hor Misten is the mitsen where the Horpa belonged to but they also admit böba every year and there were many of them, but the majority is Horpa. But the people from Damshung [Tib. འདམ་གཞུང] is not in Hor Misten and it is in Tsokhag Mitsen. Tsokhag has people from Damshung and also little Mongolian called Alashar [Tib. ཨ་ལ་ཤ].   

**Q:**  Alashar is Inner or Outter Monglolian?   

**A:**  I am not sure. Probably, it was located in Tshongön [Tib. མཚོ་སྔོན] and Amdo from Tshongön also is belonged to Tsokhag.   

**Q:**  How about Tsenpo?   

**A:**  Tsenpo is Amdo.   

**Q:**  Thorgö is belonged to Inner Mongolia, right?   

**A:**  Probably, but in the past there was no talk about Inner and Outter Mongolia. At that time, Kharka [Tib. ལྷལ་ཁ] is regarded as Outter Mongolia which is belonged to Samlo and the Mitsen was called Kharka Mitsen.   

**Q:**  Who were there in Washu?   

**A:**  In Washu, they were all Khampas like Lithang [Tib. ལི་ཐང] which had nomads and farmers and the nomads are in Gomang and the farmers are in Loseling. In the past, it was said that there were three mitsen in Washu: Washu and Biru [Tib. འབྲི་རུ], I cant think of the third. Gunglung is also from Amdo and most of the monks from Jangya area comes there.   

**Q:**  Under Samlo there is one called Bindo[Tib. ?} where are they from?   

**A:**  They were from Amdo.   

**Q:**  How about Thori [Tib. ?] Mitsen?   

**A:**  This probably is under Samlo. In Samlo there is Kharka and Jankya. I am not sure about Lampa.   

**Q:**  Is Gungru Khamtsen consisted of Khampas?   

**A:**  Yes. Most of them were from Pagshö, [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད]. Bati, [Tib. པྲ་ཏི] is Amdo. Gungru, Bati, Hamdong and Samlo were the 4 Nachen [Tib. sna ? chen] and they were also the 4 tratsang chabu who deals with politics. And the labrang chandzö comes from one's own labrang.   

**Q:**  Lunbum [Tib. ཀླུ་འབུམ] and Tayön [Tib.] are Amdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tayön is not belonged to Gansu?   

**A:**  Now I am not sure to which province it belongs to.   

**Q:**  How about Thepo [Tib.?], Shungpa, [Tib. གཞུང་པ]?   

**A:**  Thepo and Shungpa is Amdo. Tindrö;; Thepo is the Amdo from Tsongön, probably that was called Jone [Tib. ཅོ་ནེ], right?   

**A:**  Yes you are right.   

**Q:**  Jone is Gansu. How about Gashing, Tranye and Sungchu [Tib.ཟུངས་ཆུ]?   

**A:**  These are all Amdo and Sungchu is from Amdo Ngapa, [Tib. རྔ་པ].   

**Q:**  There is a mitsen under the Sungchu called Nganpo?   

**A:**  This is Nyembo [Tib. གཉན་པ྄ོ] Mitsen [Tib. གཉན་པ྄ོ] which is not under Sungchu. There is a monastery called Ngenpo in Phempo which was probably belonged to this mitsen. This is independent mitsen and do not belong to khamtsen. There are no Amdo etc from the long distance in this mitsen. And most of them were from Phenpo.   

**Q:**  This is under the Gomang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This is similar to Lamba Mitsen whoes monks come entirely from Tölung.   

**Q:**  So, böbashung, Gadong, Nganpo and Lampa, these mitsen have only böba, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How about Chubsang [Tib. ཆུ་བཟང]?   

**Q:**  In the past, there were Amdo in it and there was a also lama called Chubsang Rimpoche, but in our time [at 1950] it was entirely böpa and there was no Amdo. The most of the monks were from Tölung Chubsang.   

**Q:**  How about Chatre, Rebtsa and Chepa [Tib.???]?   

**A:**  These are all Amdo.   

**Q:**  Ngari [Tib. མངའ་རིས]] is from Ngari, right? Yes, this is Tö Ngari.   

**Q:**  There was one called 14 tsondu members of Hamdong, right?   

**A:**  There was no 14 tsondu members of Hamdong tsondu. It is called Hamdong Tsondu. 14 tsondu members are in the Gomang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  We couldn't get 14 members no matter how many times we counted. Who were in there?   

**A:**  The 14 tsondu members included: 4 chabu, 1 labrang chandzö, 2 uchö, 2 nyertsang, 4 Nachen and the abbot. And the president is the abbot.   

**Q:**  What is the Nayog [Tib. སྣ྄་གཡོག]?   

**A:**  Among the 16 khamtsen, the 4 big khamtsen are called 4 Nachen and when the terms of the senior, drepa, [Tib. བགྲེས་པ] is over, the new drepa would come from one's khamtsen like Hamdong and Samlo. The others are called 12 khamtsen. From them everyday, they have to send three people by turns who were called Nayog, the servant for the Nachen. They make food and serve tea, etc.   

**Q:**  Do they go by turn in one year or what?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the 4 Nachen would not have to do this, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They become Nachen for 5-6-7 years.   

**Q:**  When a new monk is first made, what happens? For example, were the Hor regarded as coming from long distance, tharingga [Tib. ཐག་རིང་བ] or near by, nyekora [Tib. ཉེ་འཁོར་བ]?   

**A:**  The new monks who join for the first time were regarded as nyekorwa. As for the tragyun from Amdo and Kham, the ones who come from distance had a different way of joining the monastery. And the new monks, the ones who become monks at a young age also have a different way of joining. They have to start from khatog garmar when they enter the monastery. From khatog garmar to Düdra, it takes six years and in each year there were 6 chöthog and they have to memorize the pecha for the monthly chöra, dachö, [Tib. lza chos] etc. The monks who come from the monasteries in Kham, Amdo, they start from the pecha recited at the assembly, döndönchog, [Tib. འདོན་འདོན་ཆོག] and they don't need to go through the Düdra.   

**A:**  What would the new monks who are 5-6 years old have to do when they become a monk?   

**A:**  At first you stay in the shag. Then you have to go to the abbot for the new audience, sarjal [Tib. གསར་མཇལ].   

**Q:**  At first you have to find a gegen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, don't you need to meet the khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  No. The tragyun would have to meet the khamtsen gegen first. But the new monks first you stay in the shag. And after 5-6 days, you go to see the abbot in the labrang and the gegen would take you there.   

**Q:**  Would you call this sarjel?   

**A:**  Yes. At this time you take a small tea in a small pot, a khata, and 7 and half karma, chegye, [Tib. ཕྱེད་བརྒྱད].   

**Q:**  Did you have to carry them?   

**A:**  The gegen carries them in his hand and gives it to the abbot and the abbot gives you the ordain name [Tib. ཆོས་མིང] and I was given the name Gendün Nyima because the abbot was called Gendün Lobsang, [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བློ་བཟང], so he gives part of his name.   

**Q:**  When you put these on the table, would your gegen stand there?   

**A:**  Yes, the gegen stands there while I prostrate.   

**Q:**  Would the gegen prostrate?   

**A:**  No. After I porstrate, the abbot cuts the tuff of my hair [Tib. སྐྲ་ཕུད].   

**Q:**  What would you call this vow? Would you call it ordained monk's vow [Tib. རབ་བྱུང་གི་སྡོམ་པ]?   

**A:**  This is just the new audience and then you take the monk's vow and they would accumulate and when there were about 50-60 boys, we would take the monk's vow together.   

**Q:**  What is the meaning of cutting the tuff of the hair?   

**A:**  This is to say that I am going to become a pure monk.   

**Q:**  Then would the abbot confirm your khamtsen?   

**A:**  Probably, the khamtsen is confirmed wherever your gegen is.   

**Q:**  Would they give you a letter?   

**A:**  Then the abbot writes in the letter the name of monk and his khamtsen and the name of the grades like khatog garmar or uma where the new monk have to start. On the abbot's letter, the labrang would put its seal on it. The gegen would take this letter in front of main gate of the tratsang where the uchö had assembled. This is the place where the salary is being given.   

**Q:**  You have to go with the gegen, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then the umdze will check the name list in the book and enter the new monk's name in it.   

**Q:**  Did you have to offer something at this name?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Then you have become a monk and you can attend the tsog from the next day, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then you have to take the monk's vow, rabchung.   

**Q:**  You are not allowed to attend the tsog before you have the new audience with the abbot and after the new audience, then you became the member of the monk's order, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is barma rabjung [Tib. བར་མ་རབ་བྱུང] and getsül vows same or not?   

**A:**  Yes, they are same. First you get this. Then when you are 20 years old, you can get gelong vows.   

**Q:**  Do the new monks have to serve the admission tea, shugja. [Tib. ཞུགས་ཇ]?   

**A:**  It is also called sarja [Tib. གསར་ཇ]. Small kamtsen and mitsen ask new monks to give tea to all the monks. For example, I was in the Hor Mitsen. I was not alonged to Hor Mitsen, but since my gegen was Hor it was that they will admit 10 böba every year. When I became a monk I had to give 25 sang for the shugja. Later, there is a 4 days tsog called Nyerpai Düsang, [Tib. གཉེར་པའི་དུས་བཟང]. At this time, you give a tea and this is called sarja. This differs how the mitsen do it. The tratsang and big khamtsen don't have this. It is mostly done in the mitsen like Hor mitsen. For example, in Hor mitsen there are many pechawa and the tsog is big. The reason is that if you are studying pecha you don't have to do the nyerpa. So everyone does this. If you are nyerpa, then you have to give many donggo and it's hard.   

**Q:**  Can the böpa attend the Hamdong tsondu.   

**A:**  No   

**Q:**  What about Mongolian, Japanese and Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes they can all go except böpa.   

**Q:**  Is there a reason for this?   

**A:**  Yes it is the reason of where you belonged to [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས]. The most important is to have ones who will take care of the khamtsen well [he implies böpa won't do this].   

**Q:**  I heard from a monk about the saying, "the monastery is like an ocean where there are many different fishes" which means there are different kind of monks. Did you hear this?   

**A:**  Yes, we had a saying, "the great monastic seats are same as big oceans where there are fishes and frogs" [Tib. grwa sa chen po dang rgya mtsho chen po gcig pa yin/ de'i nang nya dang sbal pa yod".In the great monastic seats, there are very good monks and also there are some monks who are worse than laymen. Actually, ཐིས་ཨིས་རེདིཅུལིང, [Tib. ཞབས་སྦྱོར] the great monastic seats. The monks that come from the branch monastery do not have any choice but to learn the pecha reciting in the assembly. This is because these branch monasteries have only few monks. But in the great monastcic seats it should be like this and it is the not beneficial for the Buddhism by only having many monks. If there are monks who really learn the pecha, this is beneficial to the Buddhism. But actually there were too many monks and it was too disorderly, [Tib. རོབ་ཚ་ཐག་ཆོད] and there were many who do noty learn the pecha and there are great ones.   

**Q:**  Don't the people regard that the monks are better than the laymen in terms of karmic law of cause and effect, [Tib. ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས]?   

**A:**  Probably it might be like this but in reality the mind is really complicated. [laughter].   

**Q:**  No matter this is real or not, but was there that kind of saying in the past?   

**A:**  There is no saying that the dobdo are bad. I swear by the Buddha Statue in the Jokhang, [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] that among the dobdo, there are some sidhi,[Tib. grub thop]. But among the great geshe, some of them are strange. For example, even now there are some spending their lives as before. Maybe, they are pretending not to have any knowledge. Some are too knowledgeable, [Tib. མཁྱེན་རྒྱ་ཆེ་ཐག་ཆོད] and do all the opposite things. We can see these people now. So it is hard to say. [laughter]   

