# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.09 : Tape 9  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. sgo mang dbu mdzad chen mo, dge 'dun nyi ma]  


**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. sgo mang dbu mdzad chen mo, dge 'dun nyi ma]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 This tape talks about collecting cheese and butter from nomads and the taxes on animals. It also talks about monk boyfriends and attending the prayer assemblies and the chöra (Dharma Grove). 
  
---
### Tape 9  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_09/M_0001_09.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Did they have the right to say that they are not going to sell it?   

**A:**  No. At this time, I was about 20-21 years old. If I tell the truth, I was very rash or forceful [Tib. 'ar po] but also truthful. So the miser liked me and I didn't have any comments from the miser. Once, when I was doing this we lost one load of butter packed in skin bag, martang [Tib. mar ltang]. The people watching the butter were two people from two families and we had piched the tent. We paid them one dre of tsamba per day for watching. One day I found that one butter load was missing. So I told these two that if they didn't find the butter they had to replace it. The lost butter load was about khe 7 and a few nyaga. So we called all the nomad household heads together and told them about the loss and made them all pick up a butter load that was about the same size to know what size was lost. When one of the person name Buchung [Tib. bu chung] when his turn came to pick up the load he was shivering, but I didn't tell him anything. So then we said we are leaving and you should do something about this before we return next year. You should search the houses [Tib. khyim slog rgyab] and I will settle it next year. I thought it was Buchung, but I didn't say anything that year, although I told some people that I suspect it was Hor Buchung. We had attched small placard, [Tib. shing byang] to the butter load on which the name of the household and the weight of the butter was written. So they found that the butter had already been taken out and repacked into small skin bags. But we found the empty skin bag in Buchung's house The weight of the butter load was still with the empty skin container. After this, I had no trouble with theft. Since then, no butter was lost.   

**Q:**  With respect to selling things, pütsong [Tib. spus tshong] how do you decide how much butter you should sell?   

**A:**  The tribe, tshopa [Tib. tsho pa] would decide this. He collects the cheese and butter and we give him the tea and khata. I am not sure how he distributes it to the nomads, probably by the number of animals they had.   

**Q:**  Did you have a fix amount to sell?   

**A:**  It is according to the old system. There is a fixed amount-there is a list that both the nyertsang and thsopa have. It is fixed. In this tshopa, in the old days there were only 7 households in the place called Kyangru [Tib. rkyang ru] according to the old registration, but when I went there were about 40 household Its not far from here (about 3 hrs by car).   

**Q:**  To which county it is belonged to nowadays?   

**A:**  It is located in Markyang in the upper part of Sangshung [Tib. gsang zhung]. You get there after crossing the Dam Jogtse la [Tib. lcog rtse la]. Probably, it belonged to Damshung [Tib. 'dam gzhung] Dzong. The butter is collected by the tshopa for all the household. The khata are picked up by each family. They bring cheese and he gives them khata. The cheese is measured by the bogdre [Tib. bogs bre] that is very large. It takes only 10 such dre to fill a tenzin kharu, [thus the nomads are screwed twice, once for force selling and once by dre]. The ngaga for weighing butter was little bit bigger than the normal one.   

**Q:**  Did you take your nyaga with you?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who fixes the exchange rate? And how much was it the rate of exchanging tea in your book for the forced selling [Tib. 'bam tshong]?   

**A:**  This is fixed in the old book. Probably, for the forced selling it was 8 bakhag, [Tib. sbag khag] of tea exchanging 8 khe of butter. One bakhag = 4 bagchung [Tib. sbag chung]. In the first year when I went there, the market price for butter about 22 sang and 5 zho for one khe of butter and in the next day it went up to 50 sang. Tashi Tsering: says it increased to about 4 dotse in 1955-56. We bought our butter from Banakshöl's [Tib. sbra nag zhol] Jangdongtsang [Tib. 'cang sdong tshang] inn keeper [Tib. gnas mo]. Jangdongtsang's son was a tsidrung trainee in Yigtsang [Tib. tig tshang slob phrug] and his gegen was the gidru of our Nyertsang collegue.   

**Q:**  Was the amount of forced selling things like tea and khata a fixed number?   

**A:**  Yes. When they sell tea and those stuffs privately, it was real tea and sold for real price and they pay money for that.   

**Q:**  When the price of butter rose a lot, didn't the nomads complain or oppose when they still get paid the fixed rate?   

**Q:** . They would not do that because it was called forced selling But for extra sales they charged regular rate. When I went to chang, I and my shagtsang didn't sell anything. Basically I carried things like tea as gifts to be given when the nomads gave me yogurt and milk.   

**Q:**  The butter you got was sheep butter or yak butter?   

**A:**  When we got the butter it was mostly yak butter. Since they had few sheep in this area. While we stayed there, the tsopa had to give donggo for 3 days and 1 day by the gembo.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the tshopa?   

**A:**  When we arrive, the tsopa pitch a huge tent for us. The tsopa is the collectivity of the fathers from the 44 nomad households. The head of the tsopa is the gembo and jimi [Tib. spyi mi].   

**Q:**  The tsopa's 3 day donggo was like giving a party, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was also given according to what was the writen in the book. In one day, there is as much tea as you can drink. They also give a square of butter mix with dry cheese called thüjug [Tib. 'thud lcug] to each person in their group. On top of this, they put three smaller pieces of thü. The kungö the nyerpa and all the servants get the same thing.   

**Q:**  Did you have the system of counting the animals once every three years?   

**A:**  Yes we count the number of the animals once every three years when the one nyertsang term is over and when the new nyertsang came. I think we calculated 5 sheep = one yak, and 6 goats = 1 yak. I don't remember it the tax was on horns, [Tib. ra nyag] of animals or the heads, mgo nyag]. If its horns, the tax is more and every thing was converted to the big animals.   

**Q:**  There was another system where they divide the pastures according to the increased and decreases number of animals. Did you have that?   

**A:**  No. The better households in this nomad area had about 100 milking yak. In Yangbajen, [Tib. yangs pa can] there was a household called Thangpa [Tib. thang pa] who was the gembo, he had 440 yaks when we counted the nunmber. There were 20 odd household called Gomang Tö [Tib. sgo mang stod] whose entire total number of animals was less than Thangpa. My mother's father's household was known as Tölung Phangdong Simkhang [Tib. stod lung 'phrang gdong gzim khang]. My Mother's father came to my household Gangkyi [Tib. sgang skiyd ?] as bridegroom. The household was a very big one. His friend was Thangpai Gyentsen [Tib. thang pa'i rgyal mtshan] and helping each other in threshing by driving the yaks on the grain stock, [Tib. phyugs chag skor]. They would invite me as a guest rto their home. They got 1,000 khe of grain for the yield in a year and they had only 4 people.   

**Q:**  Did the nomads live in tent or house.   

**A:**  They lived in tents but some had small grain storage houses. When I went to nomad area, they had tents with 6-7 pillars. In the middle was the stove, they make tsamba everyday by grinding it with a grinding stone. At that time, the nomads put their grain in wet yak skins and pile them up.   

**Q:**  Did any household go extinct from among the 40 some household during your period?   

**A:**  No, but there were some big households fought that resulted in households splitting into two. The nyertsang settled these disputes.   

**Q:**  Did they have to report the nyertsang that they are going to get divided?   

**A:**  They would make law suites internally.   

**Q:**  Did they have to report the monastery?   

**A:**  If they are belonged to nyertsang, the nyertsang would settle it because the nyertsang was their main lord. When a household gets divided, each gave a gift called first offering of the division, göpü [Tib. bgos phud] to the nyertsang. This was a rule from the early times.   

**Q:**  Were there such divisions during your time?   

**A:**  In my time there was a dispute between a big household called Mani Drachen [Tib. ma ni sbra chen] The father and mother had a fight and each split taking some of the kids with them. The source of the fight was a wife's mother who lived separately and was a real troublemaker. The division was settled by the nyertsang. The nyertsang received 6 animals for the göpü.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the dispute.   

**A:**  The father said the mother is not okay, and the mother said that the father is not okay. There was no real big reason for the dispute amd all of them were old. They had older kids. The oldest son was the gembo of the area whio was called Gomang Gembo.   

**Q:**  Did the nyertsang appoint the gembo?   

**A:**  Yes. In the end they split into two houses and both became poor. There was a saying, "if you divide the rich, they will become beggars and if the poor join to together, they will become rich" [Tib. phyug po bgos na sprang po dang / dbul po bsgril na phyug po]. After this, 2-3 years passed and they decided themselves to go back together again like before. When our household did the nyertsang, it was quite early and I was about 23.   

**Q:**  How did you divide the property? Did you divide them according to the number of people or according to the sex?   

**A:**  It was by number of people without regard to sex.   

**Q:**  What did they say? What reasons?   

**A:**  They just said they want to separate. We separated just by numbers we didn't say who was right or wrong. The old grandmother was whipped by the nyertsang for stirring up trouble. She had caused many disputes in the past, so we whipped her. After we whipped her she gave us no trouble. In the end the profit went to the nyertsang and they got 6 cattle.   

**Q:**  What is the difference in the interaction of household is monastery and society? In society, there are 10 household and you have some good relations with some and bad relation with others and middle with some. Is it same in monastery?   

**A:**  In the monastery, they are not same kind of relations between shag like in the society. If some shag had good relations during gegen's time, then that would be continued during gidru's time.   

**Q:**  Was the custom of male homosexual partner, drombo, the [Tib. mgron po] widespread in the monastery?   

**A:**  It was very widespread. Nowadays there is no propblem. In the past, it was the cause of fights and even killing due to jealousy.   

**Q:**  When you were the umdze, was drombo custom conspicous [Tib. mngon gsal dod po] in the Drepung Gomang Tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes it was conspicous and it was very bad.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us some examples of killing caused by the drombo custom during your time? TT: I also heard about this though I didn't see it and there were many events in Lhasa.   

**A:**  Yes. There were and even when people were going on the road, they did that?   

**Q:**  Didn't they say that they were catching drombo?   

**A:**  Yes. TT: In the past when I was going along the Yuthog [Tib. g'yu thog] Bridge in Lhasa, a dobdo from Drepung was coming along the other way. I was afraid of dobdo. I looked at him and he was looking/staring at me a lot. So I ran as I was afraid. It was a dobdo wearing a dark maroon-blackish lower garment, shamthok. [Tib. sham thab]. He hit me with his sword scabbard on my back, but he didn't catch me. He said to me, "why am I not allow to look at you?" [Tib. ngas khyed rang la lta ma chog pa ga re red]"   

**A:**  Yes there was almost no dobdo who didn't have a dagger under his monks lower garment. In the past, I don't remember the year, but on the 1st of the 7th month when the Nyemo Lhamo, [Tib. snye mo lha mo] Opera Group was performing at Nechung and some dobdo dragged away a performer right from the stage. The shengo knew of this and later expelled them from the association the kyidu. When this happened I don't know. The boy was wearing the mask of hunter, [Tib. rngon pa]. At that time, the sponsor of the Nyemo Lhamo was shatra. [Tib. bshad sgra] The mask was sponsored by shatra. I think there were 2 or 3 who were expelled from the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Was he a dobdo who snatched away the performer?   

**A:**  Yes he was.   

**Q:**  When there is a homosexual relationship in a shag between the gegen and the gidru which was then called Androm; [Tib. a mgron]; akhu and drompo, is there anything like love or long term feelings?   

**A:**  Yes. There is a feelings like this. Most of the kudrak in the monastery have this. They all keep young gidru. Some gegen also force gidru to do this. It is was a very bad thing.   

**Q:**  Isn't this considered legal, [Tib. khrims mthun] in the monastery?   

**A:**  Although it was not legal, but nobody said anything. For example, nowadays if the Chinese communists heads are always saying that we must expose corruption and bribery, but nevertheless there is no exposure because most of the communist high leaders are doing this by themselves. So if they say a lot to the lower ones, the lower ones will accuse them of doing it. This and drombo situation in old society are the same. From the abbot and shengo down they are all doing this, so they can't say anything about this since they are all doing it.   

**Q:**  Doesn't it break the vows?   

**A:**  Yes it is. But it was uncontrollable. So because the leaders were not clean themselves, the practice was not stopped. The Chinese officials are not to be blamed. One group says Chinese are terrible. But all Chinese are not bad. Even among the kudrak and lamas, there were ones who didn't act morally upright. That was ones own fault, there is nothing to blame the zhongyang. "if you do good work now, you will do well in future life. If you do bad things against the law of cause and effect in this life, you will suffer in this life and in the next." It is similar ot what the Chinese say, "good deeds have good result and the bad deeds havw bad result" [Tib. las ka bzang po byas na 'bras bu bzang po/ las ka ngan pa byas na 'bras bu ngan pa] Most Tibetans think about the next life. Let me tell you a saying, "to see the effect of your past lives, look at your present life and to see where would you go in the future, look at your mind in this life" [Tib. snga ma gang byas da lta'i lus la bltos/phyi ma gang 'gro da lta'i sems la bltos] So this view wasn't really being utilized in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Is it considered the same as having sex with women?   

**A:**  No its not. There were no women in the monastery. If a monk secretly slept with women, in a year or two the other monks would find out or something bad will happen.   

**Q:**  What kind of bad thing would happen?   

**A:**  They would get sick, or run away since they knew they had done wrong and feared they would be exposed, or they would be found out and captured or they would become a person who steal things though usually they don't. In general his facial appearance will change.   

**A:**  Yes. If a dog bit a monk, it is said that he lost his celibacy. Trindö says: In Ramoche [Tib. ra mo che] in the Lama Gyüba custom, if a dog bit a monk he would be expelled saying that he had lost his celibacy.   

**A:**  Yes. If a dog bit a monk, it is said that he lost his celibacy.   

**Q:**  Do you monks in Drepung also have this rule?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  T.T: what happens if a dog bit a monk who was celibate?   

**A:**  A dog won't bite a monk if he is celibate. They couldn't stop this because the officials were all doing.   

**Q:**  If a monk have sex with a woman, it is regarded as he lost his celibacy, but if a monk have homosexual with his gidru, this was not regarded as losing the celibacy, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They say that is is not good, but they don't lose their celibacy, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They couldn't control it because they were doing it. TT: This is like the saying, " In speech the lama says things, but in deeds, the lama does" [Tib.gsung rgyu bla mas gsung yong/ mdzad rgyu bla mas mdzad yong]   

**A:**  These things happened because they do not know the principle of the religion though they wear monk's robe and did reckless things. Accept some monks who really have a pure vow, most of the monks were like this.   

**Q:**  What did the gidru think and feel or fif they agree to that?   

**A:**  They didn't think anything since the gegen did it through force. There is another saying of gegen when they are teasing their gidru: The gegen said,"If I fall, where will I fall? I will fall on you. If the sky falls where will it all, it will fall on the floor. Then I will fall on you" [Tib. nga zag na ga par zag gi red/ khyod rang sgang la zag gi red/ gnam zag na ga par zag gi red/ gnam sa mthil sgang la zag gired/ 'o na zags song] [laughter]   

**Q:**  This means that even the gidru didn't want to do it, it was kind of forced him to do it, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If a shagtsang's gegen wants a drombo, he can get it from others, right?   

**A:**  If a shagtsang's gegen wants a drombo and if another one has one, he will summon (the drombo). Jiso nicknamed Takhare [Tib. stag kha ral] had a group of them.   

**Q:**  TT: Wasn't there a famous drombo of Gomang called Ojo, [Tib. o jo]? Which Nyertsang did he stay with?   

**A:**  He didn't stay with a nyertsang. He stayed in Tagtser, [Tib. stag 'tsher] Labrang and even went to China.   

**Q:**  When they keep the gidru and when he gets old, would he have some kind of authority in the shag?   

**A:**  If the gidru didn't have any problem [Tib. gnas tshul] the gegen give them all the wealth of shagtsang. If they have problem, the gegen and gidru would get separated. Sometimes they break up and the gidru says after awhile, I won't stay and they divide up the property.   

**Q:**  Is this [homosexual] done if the gidru is one's relatives?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  What is the spelling of 4 Nachen?   

**A:**  "Na" must be the name of the position, [Tib. gnas] because only the 4 khamtsen have the Nachen and they could become the tratsang chabu.   

**Q:**  It is said that the main shöndre of Gomang is going to tshog chöra. Do all of them go to the tshog chöra?   

**A:**  It is said, but not done. When I was the umdze, mostly in the morning session there is karam trekor, [Tib. bka' ram gral skor] karam sarma [Tib. gsar ma] drekor. That is one group who have to go; then there are a few older monks who are lagyüba. There are only about 30 old monks there which is like one person from one grade. In the afternoon chöra, nyinchö, [Tib. nyin chos] there are some more, about 200-300 monks. In Kurim, [Tib. sku rim] there are also about 200-300 monks. But if there is alms and salary then a lot come. When we assemble chöra in Gomang, I feel sad [because there are so few monks]. In fact, the Deyang Tratsang's chöra is more than ours even though they have much fewer monks than us. My shag was near Deyang so I saw. As for the tragyün they are special in that they start off chöra from the dön dönchog and they also have done shöndre in their own monastery so they don't have to do shöndre in Gomang.   

**Q:**  At Jang günchö, is there any special salary for Gomang?   

**A:**  No extra. They continue to get the monastery's alms and salary and whatever there is at Jayan günchö. The first time they go to Jang günchö, the abbot of Jang günchö comes around with a tea pot and gives the new monks tea and says from this time [?] on you are under the rules of Ratö [Tib. ra stod] for one month and the half month and the monks became like they joined Ratö during that time. At Jang günchö there were: Loseling, Deyang, Gomang, Je and Mey and in the past, only Ganden Changtse [Tib. byang rtse] was there and Shartse[Tib. shar rtse] wasn't at Jang günchö, but they convene at the Sangphu Yarchö [Tib. gsang phu dbyar chos]. In general,Jang günchö and Sangphu Yarchö were similar to the Lama Gyüba going for the chöthog.   

**Q:**  Trindrö: Wasn't there a saying regarding the Jang günchö, "if people say that I was not at the Sangphu Yarchö, this means thet I am dead and if people say that I was at the Jang günchö, this means that I have got mad." [Tib. 'jang dgun chos la nga slebs 'dug zer na/ nga smyo pa red/ gsang phu gyar chos la nga slebs mi 'dug zer na nga shi ba red]. [laughter] So it seems that it was hard at Jang günchö and it was happy in Sangphu Yarchö, right?   

**A:**  It is hard as there is a lot of debating and tests. You have to stay up late at night and it is very cold each tratsang also would give you the exams. I went there for one year.   

**Q:**  When you went there how many monks attended?   

**A:**  About 1,000 monks because the assembly hall was full. At the Sangbu Yarchö it is more like a picnic.   

**Q:**  There were the monks from the Sera, Dreping, Ganden and Ratö. Who else were there?   

**A:**  Probably there was Ramey, [Tib. ra smad] also.   

**Q:**  Can you tell about dönsang or kesang, [Tib. skad bzang]?   

**A:**  Dönsang and kesang mean the same thing, but in Gomang we call it ketre [Tib. skad gral]. In Loseling, they call it Dönsang Kesang. They are the same but with different names. Dönsang means you are good in prayers, but do not have a good voice. Kesang means you have a good chanting voice. In Gomang, e.g., we were only allowed to use one's natural voice rangke [Tib. rang skad] and we were not allowed to use dzo sound, dzoke [Tib. mzo skad] [the deep stylized voice]. Sera has still different names for this [these is an example of these two on the tape]. The tsogchen umdze have to use dzoke, but in Gomang we only use natural voice rangke in the tratsang. So when I was the Gomang umdze although I only had to use rangke, I had no choice but to learn dzoke. If you ask why, in Mönlam, [Tib. smon lam] Prayer Festival for 12 days we have to use dzoke.   

**Q:**  How did you learn it?   

**A:**  To learn dzoke you have to look for some young monks who knows the dzoke. In the monastery, there are some youths who know, so you ask them to help and then you go outside the monastery to practice. Sometimes, you have to practice holding your head back and sometimes with your head bent over. That's how one learns. If you don't know dzoke you can not be tsogchen umdze so he studied it.   

**Q:**  How do you do this practice from the beginning?   

**A:**  For 6 years, we memorize the prayers of Düdra and we take the exam. In one year there are 8 session, chöthog, [see above] at these times in the chöra, the gegö and umdze will test the students. At the monthly chöra called dachö [Tib. zla chos], there are more days of tests and the 20, nyishu [Tib. nyi shu] chöra is less tests and at 15 jönga [Tib. bco lnga] chöra there are the least tests. Then you study lurik after this is finished. When you are studying lurik, the umdze does a lot of examining (looking). From among the students doing lurik, the umdze looks them all over and selects the best to act as lurik umdze. This is something you cannot refuse. When they ask you to do lurik umdze, then you are automatically part of dönsang or ketrel group. Then all the moks in the grade would hold an assembly.   

