# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendun Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendun Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Legchog [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་མཆོག] first became a monk in Dechen Chönkhor [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་འཁོར],a Kagyupa [Tib. བཀའ་རྒྱུད་པ] monastery. Then at age 15 [1927], he ran away from Lhoka and came to Drepung and enrolled at Deyang Tratsang because he had a maternal uncle in Deyang. In this interview he discussed issues surrounding the Enchöndze, a monastic leader that can be drawn from ranks of abbot, chöndze, or shungshab. Discussed are issues of how a tsidrung receives the rank of enchöndze. There are also details of two governing bodies within the monasteries, the tsondu with 14 members and the 16 khamtsen. Details are provided on how the tsondu with 14 members operates and the composition of its membership. In conclusion are details of the accounting of grain and how, at times, this caused political problems with among monks.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_03/M_0001_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Enchöndze is spelled [Tib. དབེན་ཆོས་མཛད]. In the tsogchen in the past, the shengo calls out pön gökye [Tib. dpon ?] enchöndze. I remember this from when I was small they would say this first in tshog. But I don't know the meaning.   

**Q:**  Enchöndze refers to the chöndze, abbot, shungshab and anything else.   

**A:**  That's all no more than that.   

**Q:**  So there were almost 200 enchöndze in one tratsang right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they call the umdze as an enchöndze?   

**A:**  No. But once you finished your turn of umdze then you would become enchöndze.   

**Q:**  There were quite different enchöndze?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If you became ex-umdze then you would became enchöndze?   

**A:**  Yes, then you will belong to enchöndze. And you would get all share of alms and servants and salary share.   

**Q:**  All of the ex-monastic officials, lene, [Tib. ལས་སྣེ]; like uchö were enchöndze, right?   

**A:**  No, the ex-gegö doesn't become enchöndze. Gegö is nominated [Tib. མིང་མཚམས].   

**Q:**  Please tell us which monastic official would become enchöndze?   

**A:**  The shungshab who belong to Gomang would become enchöndze because they would get the share of alms. There were 100 chöndze, ex- jiso were also enchöndze.   

**Q:**  Do the tsidrung belong to Gomang stay in the monastery?   

**A:**  No. But they get the alms shares. So they were called enchöndze.   

**Q:**  Who were the tsidrung who belong to enchöndze?   

**A:**  All the tsidrung who belong to Gomang.   

**Q:**  So who was the highest tsidrung at that time?   

**A:**  There were tsidrung like Thönwang [Tib. དོན་དབང] and the Magji Tempa Jamyang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] who was the Kalön lama. And the regent Talungdra.   

**Q:**  Did they send people to get the alms and the salary?   

**A:**  Yes they send people. For example, Taglungdra belonged to Hor Mitsen and had a shag on the top floor of Hor mitsen and they had a house manager, khangnyer, [Tib. ཁང་གཉེར]. So he collects it for the Labrang. I am a relative of the former Talungdra and we were from the same household which was called Gangkyi [Tib. སྒང་སྐྱིད] which was poor in the past. And under the regent, there was the dzasa and the servant, söpön, [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] and the simpön, then the dechang were all belonged to the Gomang.   

**Q:**  There were also many orninary [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ] tsidrung, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And there was also Trunyichemmo Bumthang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] Gyanbumgang [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] Jigyab khempo.   

**Q:**  All of them get their shares through their members of the shagtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How much money salary do the monks get in a year.   

**A:**  It is hard to guess. In the registration book it may be 20 dotse. Most of the endowments was just one tranka of which the capital was 50 dotse. They use this interest and gave each monk one tranka.   

**Q:**  How much is the grain salary?   

**A:**  The tratsang grain salary was like 2 or 3 khe.   

**Q:**  Was it real barley given in a year?   

**A:**  Yes. 1 in summer and 1 in winter. I think we got one khe extra one year because we asked for it over and over, but that was only for one year. It came from Kyarpo, [Tib. སྐྱར་པོ] Shiga for that one year.   

**Q:**  So who are the other enchöndze?   

**A:**  Ex-jiso, ex-podrang depa, [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] ex-nyertsang, ex-chabu ex-chandzö and ex chöndze. But the gegö, ex-jama ex-chabril are not included. The gegö, nangma, chabyog and the tratsang servants, trayog, [Tib. གྲྭ་གཡོག] goes according to the nomitation. The abbot would nominate the better ones, but they don't get the shares of salary and alms. After finishing doing those things, they become ordinary monks.   

**Q:**  What are the 9 mitsen in Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང]?   

**A:**  In general, it is said that there are 9 mitsen in Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ] and 9 in Hamdong, but it was less than that. In Hamdong, Washu Mitsen is really three mitsen merged together. in the early times, they might be separate and doing well, but later they became poor and merged together. When I joint the monastery there were 9 mitsen in Hamdong Khamtsen. The Mitsen are; Hor Mitsen Tsogag, [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ] Mitsen, Tsenpo, [Tib. བཙན་པོ] Mitsen which is Amdo, Juchö, [Tib. འཇུ་ཆོས] Mitsen which is belong to inner Mongolian, Thorgö, [Tib. ཐོར་རྒོད] Mitsen was also Mongolian, but they didn't have many monks. They just call it mitsen, but they had like 4 monks and it was like one shagtsang. Hor mitsen consisted of people from chang, Hor, but the people from Dam, [Tib. འདམ] is not included who is belonged to Sera Je. If they join Drepung, they belong to Tsokhag Misten.   

**Q:**  There was one called Lampa, right?   

**A:**  Lampa is belonged to Samlo.   

**Q:**  How about Dingkhag [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁག྄]?   

**A:**  This belong to Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གིང].   

**Q:**  What about böbashung?   

**A:**  There were two böbashung; Gomang böbashung and Loseling böbashung. This was called böbashung because there were only böba in that. Only the böba were allowed to become the Drepung Tsogchen Shengo. In Gomang, there was Böbashung and there was the Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] Misten. These two were not belonged to the khamtsen. They were separate, but there were the monks from Samlo and Hamdong in these.   

**Q:**  Among the khamtsen, I have Samlo, Khalkha [Tib. ཁལ་ཁ] and Gönlung [Tib. དགོན་ལུང].   

**A:**  Gönlung was also belonged both to Samlo and the Hamdong. Lampa and Khalkha were belonged to Samlo.   

**Q:**  Were there two tsondu; one with 14 members and another one?   

**A:**  It was one tsondu. At first they had 14 members and they didn't have a clerk then. Later, the tratsang had to do lot of accounting and they had to deliver the accounts of 3 years to the Yigtsang. So they needed a clerk and added one clerk, then after a while they added a second clerk and then it became 16 members.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the 14 tsondu members and the 16 khamtsen?   

**A:**  The tsondu is little higher. If the 5 chabu who do most of the work can't settle an issue, they would convene the 14 tsondu member. If they can't settle it, then they convene the 16 khamtsen which was convened occationally.   

**Q:**  Who were the members of 16 khamtsen?   

**A:**  One tsondu member or a khamtsen gegen from all the khamtsen would come. In the past, there were no meetings of the monk masses.   

**Q:**  Would the 14 members of the tsondu attend the meeting of 16 khamtsen.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then there were the drepa and the 4 chabu, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In addition to that, the representatives of the 16 khamtsen would also come. This is like the tsondu gyendzom and there were altogether 32 members, but this assembly meets very infrequently.   

**Q:**  When there were some critical matters, they would call this meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were the umdze, did such things happen that they had to call the tsondu gyendzom?   

**Q:**  Probably, such things didn't happen. I don't recall it.   

**Q:**  In the monastery, do you call it tsondu gyendzom or 16 khamtsen?   

**A:**  In our tratsang we call it 16 khamtsen. That was the biggest meeting in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Can you give me an example of the discussions held by the 14 tsondu members?   

**A:**  In truth, while I was part of` the tsondu, I didn't pay much attention to it and really just sat there. The main things I worried about were the tshog and education of monks, otherwise I didn't pay much attention. Actually, the gegö and umdze were not like simple ones, [Tib. ལས་སླ་པོ་མ་རེད] since we hold the documents when the 14 members meet and we sit above the 5 chabu. The seating order in the tsondu would start form the abbot, uchö and among the uchö, the gegö takes the main incharge and then chabu, 2 nyertsang, then the khamtsen gegen of the 4 nachen, [Tib. སྣ་ཆེན] etc.   

**Q:**  In terms of seating you were higher, but the chabu holds the main power, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We don't medddle with politics because we didn't have experiences. And in the tsondu there was also a little bit of things that the Khampas have loyalty to the Khampas and the böba have loyalty to the böba,[Tib. ཁམ་ཞེན་བོད་ཞེན]. For example, I am a böpa and I would also think a little bit that if the chabu were to be a böpa it would make some difference. So they would not trust us very much. But since we have the documents, they didn't have any choice but to go along with us, [Tib. བསྟུན]. Even if the gegö is very knowledgeable, his term is only for 6 months, so it doesn't have a great influence. As for me, I only know some chanting prayers, but I didn't have a good knowledge on the main texts of tsenyi. I had the thought of studying and practcing the main texts and I studied tsenyi for a few years, but when the umdze position came open and they chose me I had to give up my study and I had to hold on my own duty on reciting and chanting prayers.   

**Q:**  How does the actual meeting of tsondu with 14 members work? And who preside it?   

**A:**  We all come and sit down and then have tea and then one of the chabu says this is the reason for having the meeting today.   

**Q:**  Was there a fixed chabu who prside the meeting?   

**A:**  No, it depends on the capablity. Of the 4 chabu, the Hamdong chabu is mostly more capable and he says most of the things like asking "What is your opinion on this matter?" There was almost nobody says such as this is good or no good. This meeting was just to pass off the responsiblity on the tsondu. Actually, there was no way to say something and it is hard to find somebody saying this is good or bad because the chabu had already decided the matter.   

**Q:**  What is the term of the chabu?   

**A:**  There was a term, but they hold it for many years. The chabu of Hamdong and Samlo are very capable and then the Gungru is capable, but the Bathi Khamtsen only has 6-7 monks because they didn't have the tragyün for many years.   

**Q:**  Is Bathi from Mongolia?   

**A:**  No from Tsongön [Tib. མཚོ་སྔོན] in Amdo. And since no tragyün were coming from there, the Khamtsen was almost empty (finished).   

**Q:**  Is there voting in the tsondu?   

**A:**  No. No raising hands and voting, etc.   

**Q:**  Can the others say we don't agree with the chabu's idea?   

**A:**  Yes we can, but nobody is heeding [Tib. བརྩི་སྒོ]. If people spoke against the chabu they would accumulate it and finally do something. For example, when the trouble of between lagyüpa and pechwa all those who had spoken for moving to the chöra were expelled from the monastery. Similarly, the reason for the local government gave many chöshi is for assisting the study of pecha the [Tib. slab pa slop gnyer]. But, it didn't help for this matter. We, the people working on that didn't do the right thing and we were storing away in the storerooms. Actually, we didn't have to store it. If they gave this directly to the monks, it would help them, but they don't. For example, in 1955 or 56 we asked that the monks livelihood in general is very difficult nowadays, and the pachawa monks have a hard time studying due to poor livelihood. Please give extra grain salary. We told many times to the chabu internally to please help us. Finally they gave 1 khe of grain extra for one year from Kyarpo Shiga. We thought of asking for this continually, but no hope at all, they had no intention of giving this regularly. We got a slip and picked up 1 khe from Kyarpo Estate [near Drepung] for that year. The shiga was managed by the tratsang and they sent the shiü and they had total of yield 700,000 khe of grain.   

**Q:**  This must be in 1959, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I know this because I did the accounts every yearly. This was the total income of the tratsang. This included all those that had been lent out and owed and that actually on hand.   

**Q:**  How many khe of grain did you have in hand?   

**A:**  There was not much in hand.   

**Q:**  Did you have like 400, 000 khe?   

**A:**  No, we might not have even 100, 000 in hand. But most of this was just on paper like old loans which the Kashag send the edict to pay it with no interest in payment arrangements [Tib. རྒྱས་དཔྱད] like paying 10 khe yearly if they owed 1,000 khe of grain. And there was one loan called Barche, [Tib. བར་ཆད] which is if someone couldn't pay the loan in this year, they would charge the interest and add it on the catital.   

**Q:**  This is like charging interest on the interest, [Tib. སྐྱེད་ལ་སྐྱེད་རྒྱག], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you do the accounting?   

**A:**  We would make the yearly accounts using traditional Tibetan diu system.   

**Q:**  The uchö have to attend this, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you do the accounting?   

**A:**  We used the diu system and we wrote the names of the different items like khata, gold, silver, tea leaves, brown sugar on small playcards and did an accounting every month and we did once 6 month and then every year. The chabu and the grain steward, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] keep an account record month by month on what they recieved in and paid out. And we then check their accounts every month. Every six months, the uchö meet with them and do the accounts for the entire six months, ending up with a listing of what they have in hand and what was spent and obtained. Then at the end of one year, there is another account for the entire year. At the end of three years, they have to do a 3 year account which is submitted to the Yigtsang. Therefore, we couldn't do it without having two clerks.   

**Q:**  When they do this accounting, did two of you, the uchö have to attend it?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Would they give you a copy of accounts?   

**A:**  Yes. In the past, the first auditing was done by Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] and he would write down everything in our book in great detail. And also each of the grain steward who went to store the grain also had a book.   

**Q:**  Supposing a shiga had 1,000 khe of the grain and when the grain steward stores the grain, would he just do it according to whatever number he was told or could he say that certain amount is actually missing?   

**A:**  If they got 1,000 khem, that is the actual number, so they will bring it as an income in the account and then they count the things that they have been spent and see how much is left.   

**Q:**  Did they write these on the paper and later they add them up ?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, we don't meddle into it because they were the ones who receive the income and spent the expenses. We look at the account and calculate what came in and went out and what is left.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, the income and the expense might get unbalanced, right? If so what would you tell them?   

**A:**  Yes. If too much was spent from one category, then the uchö would warn the chabu to be careful because they have to deliver the account to Yigtsang in three years. If something happened in the future, we will not be responsible because you were the people who receive the income and also spend the things.   

**Q:**  Do you have a fixed date for doing the monthly accounting in the tratsang?   

**A:**  It is done during a time when there is no chöra. There can be no accounting if the uchö are not present and the uchö have to go to chöra every day. The accounts are kept in a locked box. The gegö locks the locker and takes the key while the umdze puts his seal on the box. So there is no way of doing the accounting without the accounts. From the early time, they had made books for the accounts and it was also sealed. In general, when they serve traja on the holy days, [Tib. དུས་བཟང] like 8th, 15th, 30th in gelugba system , they serve rice porridge. Normally they serve tsamba soup. When they do the accounting, if they notice that the official in charge had missed giving a porrige, they have the authority to make them do it at once again [ie. next day or so]. I had the respnonsibility, so if I didn't say something about missing the distribution, since this is for the benefit of the monks, it would become my non-virtious deed. Therefore, I worked hard though I didn't have any great knowledge. At this time, there was an incident while doing the accounting where the representatives of the monks said that the chabu weren't doing their job properly and the case was filed to the Branch Judicial System where the Disputes were Settled, Gyöshib lakhung [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས]. and the monks lost the case.   

**Q:**  When did this happen?   

**A:**  The heads of this office was Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] Tsadora [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར་བ] khenjung, Rasagyagyen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན]. So I went there and when they checked all the pledges, they could not find anything wrong with the chabu's work, so the monks lost. This was probably in 1955-56.   

**Q:**  What was their accusation?   

**A:**  The mass monks accused the chabu that they are not doing good, but it seemed that they don't have substance to say. They didn't say anything to us. The main heads of the mass monks were Chabe Amdo Tsütrim [Tib. ? tshul khrims]and Chabre Gompo [? mgon po].   

**Q:**  Was this about Takhare?   

**A:**  No, the case was against the chabu and Hamdong drepa was the Takhare's gidru.   

**Q:**  What was the essence of the criticism? Were they saying that they are not paying the salary on time, or what?   

**A:**  The tratsang had good chöshi and we have good income, but the chabu aren't giving enough of it to the monks, like the proverb, the "eye medicine is not used for the eyes" so the monks are poor. The chabu have to do like the proverb, the "eye medicine should be used for the eyes" [Tib. མིག་སྨན་མིག་ཐོག]. For example, there was another incident that illustrates this stinginess. Gomang has a park called Gomang Jangseb, [Tib. ལྕང་གསེབ] located at the east of the monastery where we had alot of wood which was sold to the Chinese for 70,000 dayang before tjhe revolt. Again, there was a trouble. I said at the tsondu with 14 members, we should give this money as the salary to the monks as each monk will get 7 dayang to help their livelihood and myself will also get the share. I said this like a joke because I don't know how to talk to win over there people. The chabu said "no, the tratsang has lots of expenses and we don't have enough money for the expense". At the end, they agreed to give 3 dayang per monk. I said, okay, but the extra money we should set up an endowment (not use it as expense) so I said we should set up an in charge committee called, "joint of eight bungdzö" bungdzö gyedrel [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྦྲེལ]. This was to be consisted of 5 chabu, uchö and 1 clerk. We made a rule that none of us 8 were eligible to take loans from this. And if we lent it out to others, then the inner guarantor, [Tib. nang 'kyag] of this has to come from one of eight of us. The interest is to be 16% for one year. This was approved by the tsondu with 14 members. These rules were written in a pledge by the joint eight in charge and the pledge also included that all interest would be paid on the 3rd day of the 2nd month. This was when the interest for the year was due. We could collect the interest for one year. I acted as guarantor for one geshe lharampa, [Tib. ལྷ་རམ་པ] for 1,000 dotse for his geshe tonggo. [1,000 dayang is about 400 dotse] This was to be used for monk's salary, but nothing ever came from it since one year later the revolt arose a few months after this.   

**Q:**  Usually, when you give money loans was it given for 6 months?   

**Q:**  The tratsang gives loan for 1 year, but the other lenders such as ngünyer lent out only for 6 months. With them, the borrower also has to give a gift called shuten, [Tib. ཞུ་རྟེན] e.g., if you want to borrow 100 sang, then you have to give 5 sang as a gift. [This is the income for ngünye]. If one looks at how the government had given shiga to the tratsang and the other incomes of the tratsang's, [loan interest] there is no reason for the monks have go around doing trade and business. For example, in addition to their alms and salary, the shidü also gets 12 khe of grain salary. But if we really look at what the tratsang did, the monks didn't get what they ought to get. So when their liveliohood became poor, they did reckless things. Though there was a good discipiline, but it didn't help.   

**Q:**  What happens if there is a fight about who should get a shag [Tib. ཤག]? Who settles this? Does the tsondu get involved in these?   

**A:**  If it's in the monastery they don't. The Khamtsen settles this. But with respect to their houses in Lhasa; Gomang Khangsar [Tib. སྒོ་མང་ཁང་གསར] Jayang shar [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཤར] Jayang kyil [Tib. དཀྱིལ] Jayang nub, Tashilunpo Tara [Tib. རྟ་ར] [stable] these are belonged to the tratsang. Among these, Gomang Khangsar belonged to the tratsang. As for the other houses called Jayang were owned by Amdo Jayan sheba in the past and Gomang runs them and the chabu deals with renting them. These go only to well off people since you have to have backdoor and give bribe and the poor people will not get them.   

**Q:**  Who decides the matter of shag in the tratsang?   

**Q:**  The Jikhang [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང] is owned to the khamtsen. These following khamtsen; Tayong [Tib. ?] Khamtsen, Chepa [Tib. ?] khamtsen, Ngari [Tib. མངའ་རིས] khamtsen, Chubzang [Tib. ཆུ་བཟང] Khamtsen, Riji Khamtsen give the shag to their own monks and they would rent out the remaining shag to other monks and charge a small amount of rent. The monks who rent out shag in another Khamtsen, have to adhere to that Khamtsen's rules. Also if there is a Khamtsen tsomja, then they can attend. But they can't attend the tshog on the New Year's day.   

**Q:**  What happens in cases where there is a dispute of the division of a shag's property?   

**A:**  This is settled by the khamtsen not the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Who decides about expelling monks?   

**A:**  The abbot has the main authority over this. Then the gegö usually will discuss the case. For things like theft and such things, the tshogchen shengo generally settled it and if there are big serious disputes over shag, then sheyngo would deal with it. The chabu and the tsondu with 14 members didn't have anything to do it.   

