# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 This interview contains descriptions of the structure of monastic life. Included in this discussion are the steps in achieving khamtsen gegen, tsondu, and chandzö, as well as explanation of the responsibilities of the khamtsen chondze. Also discussed are the recipients of the yields of the khamtsen's estates. There is also mention of who is head of the tsondu and descriptions of the designations of the monks such as chora and their responsibilities.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_07/M_0001_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  If the Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen Gegen doesn't know writing and is like idiotic and incapable, would he have to be khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  Hamdong Khamtsen Gegen is done by turn, not by capabilities. But if the person whose turn come is handicapped, then he doesn't have to do it. Otherwise, even he is a mute [Tib. ཁ་ལྐུགས་པ] he have to go.   

**A:**  If some one didn't want to be a khamtsen gegen, was there any rule of paying money or giving tonggo to avoid it?   

**A:**  There is no way to pay to avoid this.   

**Q:**  After finishing khamtsen gegen, you enter tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were the monastic officials, lene [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] like the steward, nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང], chabu, the grain steward, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] and jama appointed by the tsondu or the chabu?   

**A:**  The tsondu would appoint them.   

**Q:**  What other lene were there?   

**A:**  There was chandzö.   

**Q:**  In the khamtsen do you call them chandzö or nyerpa?   

**Q:**  There was the chandzö who is appointed by turn and there were others like genyen [Tib. དགེ་བསྙེན] who were appointed by their khamtsen. The khamtsen gegen was obliged to do some of the lene like nangsen and the Nyungjai Jama [Tib. ཉུང་ཇའི་ཇ་མ].   

**Q:**  Khamtsen gegen have to hire the people, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What other positions were there that were done by turn other than the chandzö?   

**A:**  There was no other that goes by turn.   

**Q:**  Who is selected by turns? How is it done?   

**A:**  These two are by turns for the 9 mitsen [Tib. མི་ཚན].   

**Q:**  If you are not in a mitsen, then you don't have to do khamtsen gegen, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. The ones who become the khamtsen gegen definitely have their mitsen. So there is a direct relationship between the khamtsen gegen and 9 mitsen. I think the khamtsen gegen appointment custom is like the feudal system [i.e. not by qualifications but by turns between mitsen].   

**Q:**  What you said about the tsondu is the khamtsen tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  First they become the khamtsen gegen and then they become chandzö, right?   

**A:**  The monks who have done khamtsen gegen can attend the meeting. There were many monks who have done the khamtsen, but have not become chandzö. I heard those people were not allowed to talk in the meeting before they become chandzö. I am not sure whether this is true. Usually, the chandzö's turn comes only 3-4 years after they having finished the khamtsen gegen.   

**Q:**  Did Hamdong Khamtsen have chöshi?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This is the job of the chandzö, right?   

**A:**  The tsondu manage it.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the tsondu?   

**A:**  There are about 40 monks in the Hamdong Tsondu.   

**Q:**  Who were allowed to join the tsondu?   

**A:**  Only the people who were belonged to the tsondu [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] will attend the meeting and jiso also comes from the tsondu. And the tratsang gegö, the umdze and those belonged to the tsondu can attend the tsondu. Others are not allowed to attend the meeting. This was because these khamtsen gegen came from 9 khamtsen.   

**Q:**  The ones who have position in the tratsang were not in the tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For example who would come to the tsondu?   

**A:**  At our time, the main one was the jiso nicknamed "tiger with a torn up mouth" Takhare [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ] who bemame the Hamdong senior, Drepa [Tib. བགྲེས་པ].   

**Q:**  Is Jiso Takhare from central Tibet?   

**A:**  He is from the north, Hor [Tib. ཧོར].   

**Q:**  He had already become khamtsen gegen, right?   

**A:**  Yes and he became the member of the Hamdong tsondu and since he was the jiso he came to the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Even if you become a shengo, you are not allowed to attend the Hamdong tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes. For example, except the people from Dam [Tib. འདམ་པ] all the Hor is belonged to the Hor Misten. If the tragyün who come from outside to become monk have good income or connections, they would say that they are related to somebody and make them to become a monk. But if a tragyün has no relatives and little wealth, Hor Mitsen will distribute them among the monks by writing the gegen's names on a piece of paper and rolled up like a cigarette and the tragyün would pick up one and that becomes his gegen and they will notice the gegen that this is your pupil.   

**Q:**  This is like getting a gegen through drawing kind of a lottery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In my apartment, shag, there was a member of the Hor Mitsen Tsondu. He was very poor and his mother was like a beggar and died near the clay statue house [Tib. ཚ་ཁང] in Gyanbumgang [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང]. And now he is in the Lhasa People's Hospital and he would come to see me. Two of us were the only ones survived among 5 members of our shag. If this monk didn't learn pecha and then first he would do the nyerpa (in mitsen), then he would get in turn to be Hamdong khamtsen gegen and then he will be in the tsondu. If he learned pecha he could finally rise to be the Ganden Tripa.   

**Q:**  Could he do the Hamdong Khamtsen chöndze.   

**A:**  No. There was no chöndze in Hamdong Khamtsen except in the tratsang. I heard that if some one become chöndze in Loseling, one gets the title of a lama. If one did tratsang chöndze, one wouldn't have to do shöndre and even if one didn't go to tshog he gets the share and he is carefree. And if one did business, it was okay, or if one held a shiga for lease, it was okay. It was a easy life. In Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] if you do chöndze, you get the lama's name.   

**Q:**  If you are from Hor and become a chöndze in the tratsang do you have to do khamtsen gegen or the nyerpa of Hor Mitsen?   

**A:**  If you do this, then you don't have to do khamtsen gegen or mitsen nyerpa. When you become chöndze in tratsang, you have to give the misten tea three times and porridge once which usually is given by the nyerpa. Therefore, geshe and chöndze are sponsors of the nyerpa because their donggo has to be on one of the 4 days that the nyerpa have to do, so they have to do one less. There are 2 nyerpa. On the 12th day of the 10 month, the 2 nyerpa invite the chöndze and geshe for a meal because they have given the donggo during their term.   

**Q:**  What does the khamtsen chandzö do?   

**A:**  The main work was when the khamtsen tsondu meets, the chandzö would listen to the matters that was to be reported by the miser or whoever to the tsondu. He brings khata and make the report to the tsondu. And then whatever the tsondu decided, he informs the monk or the miser.   

**Q:**  What would he do when they serve the khamtsen tea, tsomja [Tib. ཚོམ་ཇ]?   

**Q:**  The chandzö has a litte connection with the tsomja.   

**Q:**  Who is the one in charge of the butter for the tsomja?   

**A:**  The chandzö would do a little bit. But there was almost no tsomja in the khamtsen. On the summer and winter solstice, there is mitsen tsomja for 2-3 days. In summer in the 5th month and in winter in the 11th month.   

**Q:**  What happens with the yields of the khamtsen's shiga? Is there salary for the monks?   

**A:**  Hamdong has two shiga. One is called Kyormolung Gyangkar [Tib. skyor mo lung rgyang mkhar ?] Shiga and the other is called Jara [Tib. སྦྱར་རག] Shiga. Then they have nomads in Yangbajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན].   

**Q:**  How do they manage the incomes?   

**A:**  It was taken care of by the tsondu. I don't know exactly where the yields go. In my life as a monk, Hamdong khamtsen gave salary only one time. After 1959, during the democratic reform the masses complained that the Hamdong Tsondu ate too well and when they serve meat if there is anything left over, they take it with them. This is custom is called government custom, shunglug [Tib. གཞུང་ལུགས]. Most of the food is meat. Sometimes there is also a big bowl of rice and yogurt and they serve melted butter in a porcelain cup with a long handle [Tib. ཡུ་རིང]. The melted butter is poured on the rice and then sweet potatoes [Tib. གྲོ་མ] are added to make it droma dresi. One person can't eat all this so they carry an aluminum pot to pour the remainder to take back to their shag. The khamtsen's jama and the assistent jama, jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] take these pots back to the tsondu members' shag for them. If we get droma dresi in morning we get meat at night. When Hamdon tsondu get meat, it is better than others. There is a special cook called genyen who does this. In 1959 the newspaper said that Hamdong tsondu put the butter in the tea of which the amount was bigger than the kettle. In any case, the tea was called trangkhyoma [Tib. ཏྲམ་འཁྱོག་མ] which means that the tea had so much grease that a trangga garpo coin would not sink down when it is placed on the grease. I have never attended tsondu, but I have gone there as servant. So I know that the tea is really like that. The Hamdong tea is famous. In the morning they serve a tea called "gathering tea" dzomja [Tib. འཛོམས་ཇ].   

**Q:**  Who is the head of the tsondu?   

**A:**  The dreba were the heads. If they have tsondu in winter, droma marku [Tib. གྲོ་མ་མར་ཁུ], which is sweet potato mixed with melted butter. In winter they serve the rice porridge called Tashi [Tib. ཐ་ཤི] and in summer they serve the noodles, gyathug [Tib. རྒྱ་ཐུག]. After this meal, they get one of these thick teas. Then they get rice and yogurt, shomdre [Tib. ཞོ་འབྲས]. This was a unique meal served during the opera festival in Drepung called Shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] which means the feast of yogurt. Then they get evening/late afternoon meal. These are not daily. They occur at the bathing picnic, chabshug [Tib. ཆབ་ཞུགས]--for 4 days and two days picnic called, Ngape Linga [Tib. ལྔ་པའི་གླིང་ག] held on the 5th month. And 4 days for the feast on Tibetan New Year, Losar [Tib. ལོ་གསར་སྟོན་ཆེན]. But just before 1959, they reduced chabshug to 2 days. In addition to the tsondu members, the khamtsen jama, nangsen, nyungjai jama, khamtsen jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] also get shares. E.G. when they serve meat they have a special system whereby they give only the better parts of the animal to the tsondu seniors by placing the whole mutton carcass upside down facing the tail to the seniors where the seniors get the lower part of the carcass and then the ribs and the worst part which is the sheep neck is given to the 4 nyungjai jama and nangsen.   

**Q:**  Who decides to send the shidü and the person bringing grain to monastery etc?   

**A:**  The tsondu.   

**Q:**  But there is daily type of work and the tsondu meets irregularly, so who deals with the letters received from the shidü etc?   

**A:**  This is done by the 4 drepa. This means the 4 senior most monks in the tsondu. They are like the standing committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས].   

**Q:**  Who were the 4 drepa?   

**A:**  This is not the monk's seniority, but they were the senior in the tsondu. If you want to ask about these, there is still a jama alive called Gyentsen Lhawang [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལྷ་དབང] in Drepung Gomang Nganpo [Tib. ངན་པོ] Misten. He used to be the jama of Hamdong at the time of the revolt.   

**Q:**  Was he a member of the tsondu?   

**A:**  No. He was a jama then who knows these clearly.   

**Q:**  Were there any other tsondu members still alive?   

**A:**  Yes. There is chandzö Wöser Chönphel [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་འཕེལ], Tshokhag [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ] Mitsen.   

**A:**  Did you have to pay money when you join the Hamdong Khamtsen?   

**A:**  One doesn't have to pay money. The khamtsen gegen will put the name on the list and then give it to the uchö. Hamdong Khamtsen had a butter salary [Tib. མར་ཕོགས] which only the Hamdong Khamtsen had. It had about 4 jin. This was given at the time of the New Year. This butter come from Sog Dzong [Tib. སོག་རྫོང] which was belonged to Hamdong.   

**Q:**  There were about 400 hundred monks, right?   

**A:**  One thousand monks.   

**Q:**  The uchö makes the name list in the tratsang. So who would make the name list in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  If the tratsang umdze is from that khamtsen, the umdze will make the list and he would also read the name list. At that time, the tsogchen umdze was also from this khamtsen. After I became the umdze, a new one came who is still alive.   

**Q:**  There was the böpashung both in Loseling and the Gomang, right?   

**A:**  Both Loseling and Gomang have böpashung mitsen, but they had separate houses. However, Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] mitsen is only in Gomang. The shengo goes from böbashung and Gadong [Tib. dga'gdong] Mitsen. The böpa from the 16 khamtsen of Gomang can enter the böbashung if they want to become shengo. When they enter they would serve a tea for joining [Tib. Tib. ཞུགས་ཇ].   

**Q:**  Is the ex-clerk of the tratsang included in Enchöndze?   

**A:**  Yes he is.   

**Q:**  Is ex-jiso in the bigger laji [Tib. བླ་སྤྱི]   

**A:**  No. The incumbent jiso and shengo were included in the laji. In the laji there were the incumbent phodrang deba [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] and the tsogchen umdze. As for the abbot, there were the incumbent and ex-abbot. This is called higher laji.   

**Q:**  Who were in lower laji?   

**A:**  It is also similar where the incumbent Parkhang [Tib. པར་ཁང] and Chökhang [Tib. མཆོད་ཁང] were there. The Government appoints these.   

**Q:**  Regarding getting fire wood [Tib. ཤིང་སློང] for the Jang günchö, would all the monks get that?   

**A:**  Only the monks who goes to beg for the firewoood during the jang günchö could get that.   

**Q:**  Were the nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཙང] and ex nyertsang allowed to take 2 gidru to the tsog?   

**A:**  Yes. All the thön [Tib. ཐོན] in the tratsang could take the gidru. But the ex-gegö doesn't have this right.   

**Q:**  What is "thön"? Were the people who had been the lene called thön?   

**A:**  The people who had been the lene were called Thönsin [Tib. ཐོན་ཟིན]. It isn't for all posts. It refers to those senior monastic officials who have completed a post. The jama, for example, doesn't have it. It is a special rights since one has finished from work.   

**Q:**  When some one gave the tonggo, they become the karam gyorpön [Tib. བཀའ་རམས་སྐྱོར་དཔོན], right?   

**A:**  He gives the tonngo after he finished the karam gyorpön and then he gives the tonggo and becomes geshe lharamba [Tib. ལྷ་རམས་པ].   

**Q:**  Who would give the permission that some one had passed the exam of the karam gyorpön?   

**A:**  The abbot would give the exam. The karam gyorpön goes according to one's knowledge and it was not easy.   

**Q:**  It was also appointed by the abbot, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who would appoint the dzindra gyorpön [Tib. འཛིན་གྲྭ], the gyorpön of the grades?   

**A:**  The dindza gyorpön are not important, they are appointed by the gegö.   

**Q:**  Last time, I went to the chöra [Tib. ཆོས་ར] and I saw the monks debating where two monks sits and the others stands up from the two rolls of monks and debate. Is this a new custom or was it the same in past?   

**A:**  It is not same. In general, this is the way of debating. The two seated monks are called thamja. [Tib. དམ་བཅའ] The one standing is called person who debating is called Tagsel Tongkhen [Tib. རྟགས་གསལ་གཏོང་མཁན].   

**Q:**  What is the old monk wearing the cap sitting on the othere side?   

**A:**  The old man you saw probably was the gegö who was a trasang chöndze and a lagyüpa. I heard that he is being very strcict on the study.   

**Q:**  Usually, would the gegö have to sit there when they debate?   

**A:**  No, he doesn't have to. It was regarded better if he is there because he was supervising.   

**Q:**  When you debate, the monk who stands up is debating, but in the meabn while the monks sitting on the side swere also asking questions.   

**A:**  Yes they do like grabbing.   

**Q:**  While debating, the monks were clapping their hands like three times. What is that for? What is that when the monks waves their hands over the partners head?   

**A:**  This means his partner lost in the debate saying that you were turned around [Tib. སྐོར་བ་འཁོར་སོང].   

**Q:**  What do you mean by turned around?   

**A:**  This means you didn't understand the content of the text and you were lost [Tib. འཐོམས].   

**Q:**  In the past, they were not doing like they do nowadays where all the monks stay there, right?   

**A:**  In the past, sometimes they had chöra like this with a 3 lharampa geshe and 2 tsoramba [Tib. ཚོགས་རམས་པ] sittting as thamja. At this time all the geshe will come and sometimes even some lagyüba will come to listen and they will sit in two rolls. At this time the lama shunglemba [Tib. གཞུང་ལེན་པ] will stand up. He would recite the main text of the dialectics and they start the debate. Actually, this was the exam taken by the lharampa. Everyday, they hold two debates ; one was called karing [Tib. བཀའ་རིང] and one was called kathung [Tib. བཀའ་ཐུང].On these occasions, they serve teas in the chöra. If it is the kathung, they serve three kettles of tea to the tsogchen trüku. These are paid by the trüku of the Ganden Tripa, tritrü [Tib. ཁྲི་སྤྲུལ] and the trüku of the abbots,khentrü [Tib. མཁན་སྤྲུལ]. The lamas will be served in silver kettles.They don't fill the tea bowls all the way up and the rest in clay pots and the geshe also have to serve tea.   

**Q:**  Would the monks in the lower grades come to listen to the debates?   

**A:**  Yes. All of them would come in line. And on the kathung debate, the geshe would throw dried fruits as a celebration.   

