# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.13 : Tape 13  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Within this interview are discussions of Donsangnga and events surrounding this assembly such as prayers and chanting. Also discussed is the structure of leadership for this event. There is an explanation of the differences between Paramita, Parchinlinga and Dusang and how to achieve each class. There is also descriptions of structures of monastic life and rights and responsibilities for different monks. Finally, there is a description of exam given to monks and the regulations of taking these exams.   

---  
### Tape 13  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_13/M_0001_13.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell me about the monks skilled in chanting prayers Dönsangnga [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་བ]. Were there any club, Kyidug [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག ] of Dönsangnga?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a kind of group, tshogpa [Tib. ཚོགས་པ] of Dönsangnga.   

**Q:**  How was the Kyidug of the Dönsangnga?   

**A:**  In general, the name was Dönsangnga, but our Dratsang [Tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] called Kedrapa [Tib. སྐད་གྲྭ་པ]. Before the revolt took place in Tibet, there were almost 100 members. Normally the Dönsangnga didn't specially meet for the assembly, tshog [Tib. ཚོགས]. But there were a few special times. On the 16th to 22nd of the 7th Tibetan month, we would pitch up tents in the teaching grove, chöra [Tib. ཆོས་ར] tea and food will be served from the common and the food was excellent. The monks brought their own tsamba. This was said to be learning the prayer chanting with long tones [Tib. འདོན་རྟ་དབྱངས]. Usually, they would learn for 7 days but some times for 8 days. The money for this comes indirectly from the alms, gye [Tib. འགྱེད] of the sponsors, Jinda [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག]. Whenever anyone gives alms in Gomang we go to beg for gye for theYarcha Shendep [Tib. དབྱར་ཕྱག྄་ཞལ་འདེབས]. So there is a lot of money from this. The ordinary monks, dramang [Tib. གྲྭ་དམངས] say some what disparagingly that we were holding picnic ling ga [Tib. གླིང་ཁ་གཏོང]. The assembly would hold in Chöra. But we say it is for studying the tunes of the prayers.   

**Q:**  Were there any sponsors for that?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't any special Jingdag. There are 2 stewards Nyerba [Tib. གཉེར་པ] for the Dönsangnga go to ask for donation and then hand the money over to the cashier Ngünyer [Tib. དངུལ་གཉེར] These two are done by turn.   

**Q:**  For the Dönsangnga there were two stewards?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many cashiers were there?   

**A:**  There were two cashiers.   

**Q:**  Were there any monastic officials [Tib. ལས་སྣེ]?   

**A:**  No, there was no other monastic official.   

**Q:**  The main leader was the prayer leader, Umze Chemo [Tib. དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ]?   

**A:**  Yes. The main leader was Umze Chemo.   

**Q:**  Under the Umze Chemo were there like a Vice [Tib. གཞོན་པ] Umze Chemo?   

**A:**  No, there was no Vice Umze Chenmo. But there were teachers of the tune, Yangi Gegan [Tib. དབྱངས་ཀྱི་དགེ་རྒན]. Once you finished the steward, you would enter the meeting, tsondu [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] and there are all the seniors [Tib. བགྲེས་པ] in the meeting.   

**Q:**  The steward and the cashier was done by turn, right?   

**A:**  Yes, even the Umze had to be the cashier   

**Q:**  The head of prayer leader, Yang's teacher, steward and cashier were the people who held the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. In that meeting all of the old monks were in it.   

**Q:**  The steward and cashier would take turn?   

**A:**  They will take turn.   

**Q:**  After you worked as steward then you can join in meeting?   

**A:**  After you worked as a steward then you will be considered as a senior.   

**Q:**  How many cashiers were there?   

**A:**  There were two cashiers and two stewards. Even you were Umze you have to work as a cashier.   

**Q:**  Even you were Chenmo [Tib. ཆེ་མོ་བ] you have to work as a cashier?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Working as a cashier and steward was like a tax?   

**A:**  Yes, as for the steward, like me I didn't work as a steward but I did the Umze. But I have to work as the cashier.   

**Q:**  You may not work as a steward, but you have to work as cashier?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there any special taxes for the Dönsangnga like going to Lhasa or to Norbulingka [Tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ]?   

**A:**  No, there was no tax.   

**Q:**  If there were rituals in Norbulinka and Dönsangnga had to go, then how would they do it?   

**A:**  If there were government rituals, shabten [Tib. ཞབ་བརྟན] called Gyakag [?]. There were two dratsang; Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང] and Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང]. They would take turn for the Umze for the Gyakag.   

**Q:**  What dose it mean by Gyakag?   

**A:**  Gyakag means the rituals for the Tibetan government. When you reach your turn for Umze you have to do the Umze and if you were not capable then you can hire some senior monks for your replacement for Umze.   

**Q:**  If Umze turn reached Loseling, then the Dönsangnga would go from Loseling, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You had to go to Norbulingka or any other places. You had to go to Potala also, right?   

**A:**  We didn't go to Potala that much. We mainly go to Norbulingka.   

**Q:**  Did they go to Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང]?   

**A:**  No. Gyakag Umze will take turn and at some point you will reach your turn.   

**Q:**  When you go to Norbulingka there was no fix time?   

**A:**  No, there was no fix time.   

**Q:**  They would serve food but did they pay you the salary?   

**A:**  No, but we will get alms.   

**Q:**  You didn't need to give the alms to the common?   

**A:**  We can keep it by ourselves   

**Q:**  If there were Shabten like reading scriptures in Norbulinka, it might take for many days?   

**A:**  Yes, it will take for a month.   

**Q:**  During one month you had to stay in Norbulingka?   

**A:**  We had to stay in Norbulingka and we had to take our bedding. It depends on the rituals, shabten, if the shabten was busy then we have to do it continuously for all day and if it not so busy then we would have one hour off and we can go to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were there any other rules and regulation for the Dönsangnga?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  The Dönsangnga didn't have to work as obligations of young monks in monastery [Tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ]?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have to do work even for serving tea in assembly.   

**Q:**  The future of the Dönsangnga is to become the head of Umze?   

**A:**  Yes, if you had a good voice this is the route to become the Umze Chemo and you had to learn the prayer chanting with long tones.   

**Q:**  When you became the Chenmo, then you can join the meeting in the dratsang?   

**A:**  When you were working as a Chemo you are in the meeting.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between Paramita the perfection, Pharchin Linga [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན་གླིང་ག] and Düsang [Tib. འདུ་བཟང]?   

**A:**  Yes, they were separate. Düsang means assembly, tshog. Pharjin Lingka means when you graduate from Pharchin class, if there were 100, monks in the Pharchin class and if there were incarnate lama [Tib. སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ] and a title purchased in monastic exempts the holder from most work obligation the Dratsang Chonze [Tib. གྲྭ་ཚང་ཆོས་མཛད] or some of rich pupil of monk's household Shagtsang [Tib. ཤག་ཚང་དགེ་ཕྲུག], the class would request them [for the supply for the assembly]. If there were dratshang chönze, then he would sponsor the assembly called 14th [Tib. བཅུ་བཞི] and the Lhabab [Tib. ལྷ་བབ] and if there was a Lama, he would sponsor it as the Lama Chöndze and if there was no Lama and Dratsang Chönze, then the class would request the better monks for sponsor.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by 14th?   

**A:**  That was a name of assembly which was held in 11th month. On that assembly Dratsang Chönze should sponsor it for the whole day. Lama Chönze would sponsor on the Death Anniversary of the Tsongkapa, Ngamchö [Tib. ལྔ་མཆོད]. When they held the Pharchin Linga there was an assembly. There were Dracha Chönze [Tib. གྲྭ་ཇ་ཆོས་མཛད] and Linga Drepa [Tib. གླིང་ག་བགྲེས་པ] these name were given by Deyang Dratsang [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས]. On the assembly of Pharchin linga, the Dracha Chönze would serve the 4 times of tea and porridge, thukpa [Tib. ཇ་ཐུག] in morning assembly. Linga Drepa would serve 4 tea and 4 thukpa at noon [Tib. གུང་ཚིགས]. And Linga Chönze would serve tea. The assembly would hold like that.   

**Q:**  This offering was done in the Pharjin linga, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Lama Chönze would serve food made from boiled wild sweet potato and melted butter Droma magu [Tib. གྲོ་མ་མར་ཁུ]. On the Festival Commemorating the Buddha coming to the earth, Lhabab [Tib. ལྷ་བབ་དུས་ཆེན] they would serve chopped up meat boiled with rice, Thashi. On the 14th [Tib. བཅུ་བཞི] they would serve yogurt and rice.   

**Q:**  These expenses were from the private?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You should request the better monks for offering?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to request. Whenever there were people making offering, you can ask donation for the Pharjin Düsang, Lorik Dusang ]Tib. blo rig 'du bzang], kyatrab yarcha. [Tib.??] In the class there were monks who oversees the recitation, the Kyorpön [Tib. སྐྱོར་དཔོན] will keep the donation. The Kyorpön was same as the head discipline officer, Gekö [Tib. དགེ་སྐོས] in the class. If you have done the Umze in Lorik [Tib. བློ་རིག] then when you came to Pharjin class, then you would be the Umze in Pharjin class.   

**Q:**  After you finished studying Lorik, then you will reach the Pharchin class?   

**A:**  Yes, it takes 5 years to go from Lorig to Pharchin. If you were Lorig Umze and when you came to Pharchin class they will appoint you as the Pharchin Umze. The monks who were the Umze of Pharjin class they were like the stepping stone to become the Dratsang Umze. Most of the Dratsang Umze came from Pharjin Umze. Anyhow, in one year there were the assembly; Pharjin linga, Ngamchö, Lhabab and 14th [Tib. བཅུ་བཞི] in 11th month. Three days drubtha [Tib. གྲུབ་མཐའ] during these 5 occasions they would pray completed introductory text [Tib. འདོན་ཆོག].   

**Q:**  The Düsang was held in the assembly, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After the assembly did they have a party?   

**A:**  In the next day, the leaders, [Tib. 'go khrd] would do the calculation. We have to borrow the assembly hall [Tib. འདུ་ཁང] to the Khamtsen [Tib. ཁང་ཚན] or smallest residential the [Tib. མི་ཚན]. The lamas were holding assembly in their respective Khamtsen or Mitsen where they belonged to [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས]. Otherwise you have to find a place to join the assembly.   

**Q:**  Was is not okay to hold assembly in Dratsang's assembly hall?   

**A:**  No, there were only 100 monks in one class.   

**Q:**  When they were holding the assembly, the expenses of tea will be given from the common?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After the assembly was finished in the evening, would the monk relax and enjoy themselves?   

**A:**  The assembly would hold until 1-2 a.m. In the next day the ordinary monks didn't need to come to assembly. The Kyorpön, Lama Chönze, Dracha Chönze, Linga Chönze and those who have title would come to assembly and in assembly the food will be served. On the assembly they would do the detail calculation that how much donation they got and how much expenses had been spent. As for the reason for spending little expenditure was that you could do dialectics debate called the Pharchin Damja [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན་དམ་བཅའ] even though you were not studying dialectics. For that, the monks studying dialectics would debate with the Lama Chönze, then the Kyorpön, Umze, Lhabab, Jubshi and Geshe. The Pharchin Damja was held in 12th month. All the monks would wear the new clothes and in the Big assembly, tshochen [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] they carry around incense on the first day. This is called Pharchin Pökor [Tib. སྤོས་སྐོར]. Then the Pharjin Damja in the chöra would take place for 3 days debate and you didn't have to answer, but your partners were Geshe, so they will answer the debate question. The Pharchin Damja is considered a great honor and blessing.   

**Q:**  All of them couldn't do the Damja and monks who were better in the dialectic study would do the Damja, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the monks who were good in dialectics would do the Damja and their opponent would be the Chönze and those people. This is why the Chönze would sponsor the days in the first place.   

**Q:**  You mean the Geshes who were good in dialectics would debate with the monks who had the title, right?   

**A:**  This is also done according to the degree of the Geshes like the best ones would debate with the Lama Chondze and the next would debate with the Jushi Chöndze and so on.   

**Q:**  I heard that if you were graduated from Pharchin class then you can have a separate monks apartment [Tib. ཤག] and before that you were not allowed to have a separate shak, was that correct?   

**A:**  Yes, actually, it should be like this. But after a period of time, the monks stayed in separate Shag even when they were in the class of the chanting prayers [Tib. འདོན་འདོན་ཆ] and it became kind of reckless.   

**Q:**  According to the tradition, monks would stay separated after they graduated from Pharjin class?   

**A:**  Yes, after you graduated from Pharchin class, then you would reach Madhyamika school of Buddhist the Uma [Tib. དབུ་མ]. When you reach the Uma class the monks were only allowed to use this kind of rosaries and you could have one iron marker on their rosary placed after every ten beads [Tib. བཅུ་ཤད]. And when you reach Karam [Tib. བཀའ་རམ] class, you could have a pair of [Tib. dcu shad]. But this also wasn't followed in the latter years.   

**Q:**  According to the tradition, you couldn't have separate shag before you graduated from Pharjin, but just before the revolt, the monks didn't adhere to the traditional system?   

**A:**  Yes, the monks did whatever they want.   

**Q:**  After you graduated from Pharjin then you can have separate shag and you can have pupils, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you can keep pupils. Otherwise, you were not allowed to keep. There was also a rule that the monks were not allowed to sit under the tea door [Tib. ཇ་སྒོ] unless you have been a monk during 7 terms of abbots [Tib. མཁན་ཐོག་བདུན]. But later, once you were an old monk, they would sit under the Tea Door.   

**Q:**  The monks who sit under the Tea Door were older monks?   

**A:**  Yes, the monks who have been monks during 7 terms of abbots could sit under the Tea Door.   

**Q:**  For each term of the abbot is 6 years?   

**A:**  Yes, if you have been a monk for 7 terms of abbot, then it would be 42 years.   

**Q:**  So the monks who sit near the Tea Door would be easier to get the tea or what?   

**A:**  No, it was easy for them to come and go and no shoving etc. The other monks should enter through the main gate and they have to be seated according to the their classes. When we look at them, it just looks like they were sitting there but, actually, they were seated according to the classes. The monks should sit according to their grade like the first was Karampa [Tib. བཀའ་རམ་པ] grade and then Zdö [Tib. མཛོད] grade, old Uma and new Uma [Tib. དབུ་མ་གསར་རྙིང] grade and Pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] grade. Then the Gekö will hold a kind of stick [Tib. གསེར་རྒྱུག] and the monks were not allow to crowd in and they should enter assembly hall in a peaceful manner.   

**Q:**  The monks who sit under the Tea door were special, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were special. When they open the main gate, the Umze and the Gekö [Tib. དབུ་ཆོས] would come to Dratsang Rabsel [Tib. རབ་གསལ ] after the ChÜra was over and the steward would give them a small pot of tea. Then, they would beat the first gong [Tib. འཁར་རྔ], the second gong and at the time of beating the 3rd and the final gong, the Gekö and Umze will go to enter the assembly hall. The Jayog, [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] the tea sever [Tib. ja gyok] will put on the gown for the Gekö. At that time, the incarnated Lamas of the Dratshang [Tib. གྲྭ་ཚང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] and the Chönze who were seated at the front line would stand up and then the Gekö would enter the assembly hall. It was really done wonderfully. But, later it was declined.   

**Q:**  I heard that there was a custom called Bablog Shonma [Tib. བབ་ལོག་བཞོན་མ] which means that when you first became the monk you have to get the permission [Tib. ཆོས་འཁྲོལ] for becoming the monk from the Sera Laji [Tib. བླ་སྤྱི]. If you lost your celibacy and if you were from Damshung [Tib. འདམ་གཞུང] area, the lord, [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] will take away one yak from your household, was there any system like this?   

**A:**  There were different systems for different lords. As for the monastery, they didn't have these systems. For example, if you were a monk of Kyormolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང] and if you lose your celibacy then you would belong to Ngari Labrang. [Tib. མངའ་རིས་བླ་བྲང]   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Those monks who lost their celibacy, they will belong to Ngari Labrang and they will become the miser of the Ngari Labrang.   

**Q:**  Where is Ngari Labrang?   

**A:**  That was in Kyormolung.   

**Q:**  So this became like a tax?   

**A:**  This is like a tax or like a system.   

**Q:**  For example, when you were a monk of Kyormolung, who was your lord. [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]?   

**A:**  I was belonged to the Kyormolung Dratsang.   

**Q:**  For example, the lord of Damshung was Sera Laji [Tib. སེ་ར་བླ་སྤྱི] and I heard that when you lost your celibacy then they will take away one yak from your family.   

**A:**  I see.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the past for example, in Damshung area if you become monk in Drepung, you would belong to Tshulkhang Mitsen, one of the smallest residential unit?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If you become a monk in Sera I am sure there was one Mitsen where you would belong to?   

**A:**  Yes, there might be.   

**Q:**  Just before the revolt took place, I heard that if you didn't become monk in Sera, then they won't give you the permission for becoming a monk. I heard that the examination called Chothog Gyugtrö [Tib. ཆོས་ཐོག་རྒྱུགས་སྤྲོད] was given strictly in the classes. So if you miss this exam, the Umdze and Gekö will know that you didn't join the examination?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  It would be okay to miss the final examination [Tib. རྒྱུགས་སྤྲོད་ཆེན་མོ] because they won't know you missed the examination, is that true?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they read the name of the monks when they gave the exam Chothog Gyugtrö?   

**A:**  Yes, they will read the names and if you miss three times, then they will erase your name. Right at that time, they won't notice it. But later when they pay the grain salary, you won't get the salary because your name has been erased. So if you want to get back your name on the list, you have to pay 3 sho and 7 and half karma [Tib. ཞོ་གསུམ་ཕྱེད་བརྒྱད]. Even if you put the name on list and if you didn't take the exam then they scold you very severely.   

**Q:**  I heard that the monks didn't take the exam, then there would be made to work in the teaching grove like carrying gravels?   

**A:**  Yes, they will fine them like that.   

**Q:**  But these monks will up grade the class?   

**A:**  They will up grade the class. Later on, monks must get their names written in the list and pay 3 sho and 7 and half karma. If you didn't get your name written in the list, then there would be a danger.   

**Q:**  If you didn't take the final examination then they won't know because there were many monks, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but they do not have much final examination except the Geshes.   

**Q:**  You mean for the monks who were not studying the dialectics, [Tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] even if they didn't take the final exam they won't pay much attention on that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  On the final exam, didn't they read the name list?   

**A:**  No, they don't.   

**Q:**  I was told that there were 1-2 times of final exams in a year?   

**A:**  No, that was not in our Dratsang and it might be in other dratshangs, because there were different systems even in the same Dratsang.   

**Q:**  So in Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང] they didn't have system of final exam?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have that. When you take the exam of Chöthok, you would become quite good skilled in chanting introductory text and when you reach the Lorig grade, you would become the Umze in your class. Even if you didn't become the Umze, the Umze Chenmo would give a notice to the Gekö saying that this monk had a good voice and he should be made to join the Kedrape, which as same as the Dönsangnga. In the assembly, when this monk would be seated wherever he want, the Gekö will put him in the Kedrepa's line which is in the front line. To become a Kedrepa you can't find a back door [Tib. འགོ་འདྲེན] and to get excused from that. They will just make you join the Dönsangnga. If you obey the rules and regulation that would good for you. If you were a Geshe you have to attend the great debate, Damja Chenmo.   

**Q:**  For example, if a poor villager's son has to become a monk, was it easy to find a teacher [Tib. དགེ་རྒན] in the monastery?   

**A:**  If you didn't have a relative and a monk who know you in the monastery, it would be quite hard to find a teacher. Even if you were poor and you have relative then you could find a teacher. Otherwise it is quite hard.   

**Q:**  For example, as for the pupil who was not the relative of the teacher who gave the food [Tib. ལྟོ་སྟེར་དགེ་རྒན] the teacher might give him the timely food. Did the pupil have the right to eat tsamba from the tsamba bag on other times?   

**A:**  Some of the pupils had the right to eat tsamba and some of them don't.   

**Q:**  Was the number of pupils who have the right to eat tsamba more than the number of the pupils who didn't have right to eat tsamba?   

**A:**  Probably, there were more number of pupil who didn't have the right to eat tsamba by themselves. I heard that some of the very stingy teachers would measure the tsamba spoons and give it to the pupils. But I didn't see it. Some of the teachers would control the food for the pupil. When I was small I used to think that this was very bad. No matter, how poor the household would be, they will give 1-2 khe of tsamba for the pupils. So the teacher should give them enough tsamba to be full. Even if they didn't give them other foods.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there in the monastery who didn't keep pupil?   

**A:**  There were quite a lot.   

**Q:**  The monks who didn't have pupil that dose not mean that they didn't get pupil but they didn't try to find pupil, right?   

**A:**  Yes the monks who didn't have pupil was 20-30%. As for of some them, no mater how many pupil they kept but they didn't get along well. You should keep pupil and teach him scripture and in the future he will help you when you were ill. This is kind of mutual beneficial. In the past there was one story about a pupil and a teacher. The teacher didn't give the pupil the food when he cooked good food. The child was also very clever. One day the teacher made Momo and he went to the teacher and he said, "my mother found a lump of gold which was as big as goat's head. So she said that she is planing to give half of the gold to the monk's apartment and keep the other half for the family." Then the teacher gave him about 3 Momo. After he finishing eating the Momo, he said, This was a dream that I had last night.   

**Q:**  I heard that the teacher will cook good food and they will not give the pupil?   

**A:**  That was true. In my case my teacher was my maternal uncle. And I was sent to a scripture teacher and who was a Geshe. He was very strict teacher, but he will make butter tea in the morning he would give me 2-3 cups only. He would cook a dish once in a day and all of us would eat together. Whatever food that he cooked, we would eat together. We were not allowed to waist food at all.   

**Q:**  For example, in a lay household, there were parents, brothers and sisters and they have rules and regulation?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the monastery, there were the teachers, the senior and junior pupils. So did they also have a kind of similar rules like the lay households?   

**A:**  Yes, it is quite similar. For example, in the lay households even if the parents were good, some of the sons and the grooms were very tough. Similarly, even if the teacher is very good but some senior pupils were very bad and he would beat up the junior pupils. My scripture teacher's senior pupil would beat me up very seriously and he really bullied me, but I couldn't say any thing.   

**Q:**  The way of livelihood is different between the monks and lay people for example in the village they have dishes and mixture of food and in the monastery, if you don't cook by yourselves, there were tea and rice gruel?   

**A:**  Yes, the best food in monastery was the gruel. Otherwise, there was no other food cooked because of the big population of monks.   

