# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0001.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gomang Umdze Chemmo, Gendün Nyima [Tib. སྒོ་མང་དབུ་མཛད་ཆེན་མོ, དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 This tape talks about how monks sell the layer of grease [Tib.ཞག] from the top of the tea they get at the prayer assemblies. It also talks about the economic status of his shag. It also discusses tax arrangements doing accounting in nomad areas. It also talks about how the monastic officials get a extra share of the alms.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0001_08/M_0001_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell us about the differences between shagtsang and mitsang [Tib. མི་ཚང] as lay people. What is same and what is different?   

**A:**  As for my own livelihood, when I was the umdze, I had 4 cups of tea on the traja. I don't put my mouth on the butter grease floating on the tea and I would put the butter grease in the pot called shaglug [Tib. ཞག་བླུག] and I accumulate it and take it home. Then I sold them to people who usually buy them. One [weighed] khe [= 7 gyama] of grease will be paid 1 khe of barley [=28 gyama]. In general when they sell the grease of Mönlam Festival the price of grease is lower which was 2 khe of shag is paid 1 khe of barley.   

**Q:**  This was probably because there is much available then, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Mostly they pay barley and sometimes they grind tsampa for me which was better quality than the tsampa made at home because the barley grown in the upper part of the valley is better quality.   

**Q:**  In one month how much grease did you collect?   

**A:**  I think there were 25 traja in a month and on each traja, I get 4 woolen bowl of tea. So probably I got about 4 gyama of grease per day. So in a month I would get about 100 gyama of grease, which cost a little over 13 khe of barley. I get this only during the 8 chöthog in a year. [Note: His grease is "clean" since it isn't left by blowing the grease to one side and drinking the tea underneath it. He didn't drink the tea but immediately poured the grease it into a pot and then later separated the grease]   

**Q:**  This barley was the supplement on your tsampa brought from home, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many people were there when you first joined the monastery?   

**A:**  When I first entered the monastery, there was just my maternal uncle, who was my gegen, and me.   

**Q:**  How did you make your living at that time?   

**A:**  My household at this time gave me one khe of land for my food. My family planted this field and the grain was brought to the monastery.   

**Q:**  Was this kind of regular custom?   

**A:**  It wasn't an overall custom, but some monks had it. This is done by the families. I didn't ask them to do this, they decided this among themselves because both of us were from the same family. But when my uncle became the monk, I didn't hear anyhing about that they had given him the field. I am the only son of my parents so I was treated specially. I think it was because of this that they set aside a field. I got the yield of the field from the age 7 until about 20. Then since the household was poor, they took it back.   

**Q:**  Is there a name for this custom?   

**A:**  No. And I also didn't check whether the yield was complete or not. In general, our main lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] was Kyomolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང] and they also didn't check about what yield we got from the field. We had to pay the same lease of 75 khe regardless of the harvest.   

**Q:**  What was the yield?   

**A:**  I got 3-4 khe of grain from my one khe of land. Later they gave me money. I gave it to my gegen, but kept a little aside for my own expenses and sometimes I buy some clothes.   

**Q:**  Did your gegen do any other works like going to perform rituals?   

**A:**  No. He got the alms and salary and he was also the Hamdong Khamtsen assistance jama, jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག]. It's because of this that I know a little about Hamdong affairs since I went with my gegen often to help him when they bring the rice mixed with melted butter, dresi [Tib. འབྲས་སིལ].   

**Q:**  What was the living standard of your shag when you first became a monk?   

**A:**  It was generic where we could barely manage it. [Tib. སྡོད་ཤེས་ཙམ] There were lot of troubles in my shag which would be endless to tell you. To tell you briefly, at that time, my gegen and I merged our livelihood with another shag consisting of a monk who was from chang, the Hor and his gegen. They were from Bartha [Tib. བར་ཐག] east of Nagchukha [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་ཁ]. The other shagtsang's gidru had a good income because their family was well off and they would give us butter and meat. Then the Hor gidru became the khamtsen gegen. He was older than me and younger than my gegen. At this time, the tsondu member can take one gidru with him [to the picnic], so I got a lot of experience at this time. That year, the khamtsen gegen has to give a donggo to the tsondu for one day. In general, at the bathing picnic, chabshug,[Tib. ཆབ་ཞུགས], the khamtsen gegen had to give two days tonggo and the chandzö gave 2 days and two nyerpa gave two days at this time. Later, I heard that the chabshug was reduced to 2 days. This Hor gidru later became the chandzö and then became nyertsang of the tratsang. He held it for 2 terms of 3 years. My idea was to be skilled in chanting prayers, dönsangnga [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་བ] and study pecha, but after we merged the shagtsang for 6 years I did a lot of work like trading, collecting lease fees, millings 1,000 flour etc when he was nyertsang. I also did the sendrödru [Tib. སྲན་སྤྲོད་འབྲུ་བསྡུས] where I exchanged pea with wheat at no interest (see earlier). Then I went to chang. The Gomang nyertsang had nomads in Yangpajen [Tib. ཡང་པ་ཅན] and in Nyendrong [Tib. གཉན་རོང]. There were about 10 household and in Kyang [Tib. རྐྱང]] there were about 40 household. From these we got over 500 khe of butter as a lease in a year. Once every three years we would count the number of animals [Tib. མགོ་རྩིས]   

**Q:**  Was the lease arrangement keyö chiyö [Tib. སྐྱེ་ཡོད་འཆི་ཡོད] or kyemey chimey [Tib. སྐྱེ་མེད་འཆི་མེད]?   

**A:**  It was kyeyo chiyö probably. I am not sure if it was ranya [Tib. རྭ་ཉག] or gonya [Tib. མགོ་ཉག]. If it's gonya it's one nyaga per head, if it's ranya it's 2 nyaga per animal. We did a calculation every three years when the nyertsang term ended. When I went to chang, I was about 22-23 years of age. I wasn't an umdze. I started being the umdze at age 27.   

**Q:**  Why did you merge the animals?   

**A:**  My gegen and the other shagtsang were already very close when I became a monk. We were already internally sharing the household [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག་ནང་ཤུག]. The trouble occurred at the time of the general accounting for the new nyertsang and at that time there was a problem when we hand over the capital [Tib. མ་རྩ་རྩིས་སྤྲོད]. The next nyertsang was someone in the jiso nicknamed "tiger with with torn up mouth". Takharel's [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ] household had a grudge for us. In the past in the khamtsen tsondu, the Hor and Takharel were friends. Later when we were the nyertsang, we causde a little harm for Jiso Takharel, so because of this grudge, when there was a shortage in the capital, he insisted us to pay it immediately and called a tsondu of 16 khamtsen and he also deprived the right of "thön of nyertsang." Later, after we repaid the missing capital, we got the "thön" back. At that time, we gave the tonggo quite well. Later, we owed a lot of debt and our shag became bankrupt [Tib. རྡིབ]. I was the eldest of the gidru. Under me were two younger gidru, one was a relative of the Hor and the other was a young Hor from Hor Mitsen. The latter one now works in the People's hospital. The reason for Takharel having grugde against us was when we were the nyertsang, which was appointed by the government, we asked for nyertsang at the time of the Taktra regency and Jiso Takhare also asked for that and Takhare spent a lot of expenses to secure this appointment, but since we were Talungdra's' relatives though we didn't have much regular contact, Tagklungdra was in power, so we got the position. So that might have cause a great harm to Takharel and he made my gegen break [Tib. གཏིབ] and also made me break.   

**Q:**  Did he spend a lot for bribing to get the position, right?   

**A:**  Yes he did.   

**Q:**  What was the actual problem?   

**A:**  At the time of the accounting, it was found out that the capital was not all intact. [people often take loss but the hope is to get jiso.] At the time of the problem [about 1950] I was already umdze. So I was at the 16 khamtsen meeting. But I didn't say even one word. Takharel was an ex-Hamdong dreba and incumbent jiso. The chabu and other people didn't have power, only Takharel was talking. His gidru was also Hamdong dreba and he was the incoming nyertsang to whom we had to hand over the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  How was it settled?   

**A:**  We weren't able to pay it all at once, so we paid it little by little. When it was all paid, we got back the ex-nyertsang thön. Doing nyertsang is very hard unless you have some capital in your shagtsang. It is also a hard work. With the exception of some of the butter from the nomads which was for our shag, everything else goes for the tonggo. The butter lease from chang had to arrive in Drepung by the 7th of the 8th Tibetan month. On the 9th there is a holiday and we have to give it to the monks [must be a traja]. The protective deity of these nomads was Namse Lungmarjen [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་ལུང་མར་ཅན]. It was said that the protective deity would come to watch the cauldron [when the butter was used] The butter is transported by the miser of Kyang through the stations.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go into debt for repaying the capital?   

**A:**  Oh yes. The debt was really terrible. Actually, I had 11 shares of the alms and I could also go to get alms by stretching my hands which was called Thonda Barsum [Tib. ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ] when the monks were standing on line, sharkag [Tib. བཤར་བཀག] where I could get additional shares. I could get this four times and each time I get 2 shares. If I was friendly with the jigyabpa [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པ] (alms giver), he will give me 4-6 shares each time and I take whatever amount he gave me. Normally, thonda barsum means 3 times; one at the starting line of giving alms and one in the middle and one at the end. After this, the umdze, gegö and me also go for a fourth turn called chagshug [Tib. ཕྱག་གཞུག]. [laughter] After that, the umdze, gegö and me; the 6 staffs, lecha [Tib. ལས་བྱ] have another share called kukel [Tib. སྐུ་སྐལ]. I had a big income and I gave most of my alms and salary to repay the loan, just keeping a little like 100-200 sang for myself. I was eating and living together with the shagtsang and we were also like separate [Tib. མཉམ་དུ་ལོགས་བཀར]. Most of this money was repaid by me.   

**Q:**  How many dotse did you have to pay altogether?   

**A:**  The missing amount was 1,000 dotse. At the time the reform of 1959, our shag had hardly anything too feel disappointed.   

**Q:**  Did you get separate with the shagtsang?   

**A:**  No I didn't. I thought a lot about this, but I was the only earner at that time, so I decided to stay. My gegen took care of me when I was young and it wouldn't look good now to leave when I was doing well, so even though I wanted to separate, I stuck through it as it was the proper thing to do. So my livelihood was okay by the grace of the Three Jewels like the proverb, "Although the stupa turned upside down, the layers still remain in the middle" [Tib. མཆོད་རྟེན་མགོ་མཇུག་ལོག་ཀྱང། བང་རིམ་སྐེད་པར་གནས]. I didn't end up badly even in the jail. Although other people had to pick up leather used for packing butter and eat it when they were doing road building work, but I didn't have to do that.   

**Q:**  Many people died from starvation, my young brother was sent to Kongpo prison for hiding a gun and he died from starvation.   

**Q:**  Was this in 1960?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1959, after the uprising, I was among the mass monks and I was handed over by the monks and I was arrested as a tratsang umdze [as a monastic official]. At that time, I didn't tell them about that, if I did there was a back door who was a Mongolian official who knows Chinese and he was the leader of the tratsang and I thought of talking to him and telling him that I had been expelled from the job in 1958, but I decided to not do it [implication is that it wouldn't have mattered].   

**Q:**  What would you have to tell at that time?   

**A:**  I would have to tell them about my past and how I was not in the order of the monastery etc. But I was thinking I have to pay whatever effect of karma I have to repay. If I pretend to be cadre in the future anyway I will have peoblem.   

**Q:**  Who decided the case of the nyertsang?   

**A:**  The 16 khamtsen decided it because they were called by Tagkharel. You can ask the people like Gyentsen Jigmey [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་འཇིགས་མེད] who was a lagyüba and a member of the Hamdong tsondu then and was one of the ones expelled from the monastery. And two of my collegue nyertsang were shengo who had a good income. I had a good voice when I was little. At first, I didn't have any notion of being umdze and I was kind of loafing around [Tib. སྤྲང་འཁྱམས་རྒྱག], but then when the vacancy occurred and after they competed the voices many times, I was included among the 30-40 possible replacements with good voices. From this they got the number down to the final 3 or 4 candidates and from this I was selected. My original plan was to study pecha, not to be an umdze. Later when I became an umdze it was complicated and difficult. My first studying pecha was all forgotten after I became the nyertsang. After I became umdze I envied other monks because they didn't have all the difficulties of being umdze. At this time, it was hard because it wasn't okay to be too strict on the monks and it wasn't okay to be too gentle on the monks. At this time, the relations between the shagtsang household and lay households in society were not the same. It was different. In the monasteries, for example, if you obtain a monastic official job and become a thön, then if others came to bring you a khata this means that they are friends. And they never bring tea and those stuffs even when people die. It is not like in the village when they get married. In ones own khamtsen area, just those people who are friends will come but not many. [so he means there is not the same kind of social involvement]. For example in society, some customs weren't good. Even on the 49th days after death laymen eat meat and have like a party. They almost needed to slaughter animals especially on that day. This is not good. After my shagtsang was merged, I and my shagtsang mate who was my gegen (and relative) of the nyertsang, we always went to mangja and traja. He was old and blind and I led him there. He always went to these tsog and chöra when he was younger. After he got old he went to mangja and traja to get the butter-grease. I took him for many years leading him by his hand. After the two shagtsang merged, we never had any fight. Because I served the old man well today I am happy and doing well. Even in the prison I didn't suffer through many bad things. I was in Trapchi in the team of reeducation through labour [Ch. lao jiao ban]. If I worked hard, I was treated nicely. For one year, I was made to collect firewood in the mountain everyday. I had never asked for leave. We had to bring back 70 gyama [Tib. རྒྱ་མ]. Some bring 100 gyama and some bring 200 gyama and they weigh the fire wood like they did to the ula in the old society. I worked very carefully for three weeks. I never got sick. In 1961 I was released along with 60-70 other monks. They gave the morning tsampa measured in a small can. At noon they would make a fire and boil tea and eat pag. In the morning we had to line up wearing gyabden [Tib. རྒྱབ་གདན], the vest for carrying things on one's back and the tsugdrang counted our number when we were all standing in line and made the list and the big tsugdrang of the rukhag would count the total number and make the list. Then we were handed over to the soldiers and sent with soldiers as guards to do our work. One morning while we were lined up for counting, I was told that I didn't have to go get firewood, I had to go for interrogation. I just stayed there thinking there is nothing to interrogate. Since there was no work there was no bag for the lunch. That evening, when they did the weighing of wood, even though I didn't carry anything that day, they recorded 70 gyama for me. In this manner I didn't have to work for a month and they wrote in 70 gyama every day. Some carried 200 gyama, but they go only once or twice in a week. At the end of one year when they count the final total of wood that we carried, I got the prize for carrying the biggest amount of wood.   

**Q:**  What do you have to tell us about your shag? At that time, what was your maternal uncle doing?   

**A:**  In our shagtsang, when the Hor gidru became nyertsang, my uncle (gegen) became the inner steward, nangnyer [Tib. ནང་གཉེར] of the Nyertsang. Each of the 2 nyertsang's shagtsang sent one nangnyer. The nangnyer's main responsibility was to do take out the tea in evening and the weighing of tea and the carrying of tea to the kitchen [probably the thapyog do the actual carrying and the nangnyer do overseeing.   

**Q:**  For how many years did you do the nyertsang?   

**A:**  I had to do it for 6 years for two terms. When we were nyertsang, I had to go to Kyangru where I would have to stay there for a week. During that week I had to use 70 khe of tsampa to be given to all the nomads including the beggars and I had to give them three times tea and three small iron ladle of tsampa in each day. At this time, the tonggo was for the horse race [Tib. རྟ་རྒྱུགས] and at this time I had to give chang to the nomads. On the horse race day I gave roasted barley thukpa called yöre [Tib. ཡོས་རལ] and thukpa bagthug. We gave the ingredients and the nomads cooked it on a long stove that had 7-8 pots. In Kyangru there were about 300-400 household. The iron ladle for giving tsampa is a small one and giving each of them one ladle takes only 1 and half loads [1 load = about 3 khe]. At this time, I was not the nangnyer, but I was acting as the substitute of the nangnyer. When I collected the tax in butter, if the skin was dry, I would take it as the gyama weighed itself. If it was wet (the skin), we had to subtract some otherwise it would dry on the trail and weigh less. The nomads would call me nyerpa la. I have to hand over the butter after I came back.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know writing?   

**A:**  I knew mediocre writing.   

**Q:**  How many nyerpa were there then?   

**A:**  There were two nangnyer in the nyertsang. At this time, after I returned to the monastery, I didn't have much work. Therefore sometimes the nyertsang's shiga called Shangdrö [Tib. zhang grol ?] Shiga which was managed by the nyertsang and I also went to oversee the harvesting [Tib. སྟོན་རྒྱབ] and one person from each nyertsang had to go to grind flour and I also went to do this. One nangnyer stayed on the shiga collected the wheat. The other went to the flour milling place and oversaw that operation. The older one stayed in the shiga and the younger one went to the water mill. The miser did all the transportaion of the flour to the monastery.   

**Q:**  If there was a dispute at this time did you settle it?   

**A:**  No we can't settle it. The nyertsang kungö has to settle it who had quite a lot of speacial power. For example, if a miser steals something or does something similar, then the nyertsang can whip the person on the spot.   

**Q:**  This was like having the jurisdiction over one's own subject [Tib. ཁྲིམས་འགོ་རང་བཙན] right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were the nyertsang, all of the shagtsang members had works, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When we were nyertsang, I had to do various things like going to chang. When I went there it was difficult and complicated. I had a book which told where I was to stop every night. I had to travel according to this schedule. For example, in Yangbajen, I had to stop at the fixed place and there,they would come for greeting me [Tib. འཚམས་ཞུ] by giving a khata. They didn't give meat. In general, when one goes for the greeting a person, he meets him on the road near to the destination, but the nomads come to your camp after you have arrived.   

**Q:**  Do you wear laymen clothes at this time in chang?   

**A:**  Yes I do. I also carried a gun.   

**Q:**  Did you go alone or with others?   

**A:**  When I go to collect lease, there was the nyertsang kungö and some others like one clerk, nyerpa and a few servants.   

**Q:**  What exactly did you do there?   

**A:**  We left the monastery for chang at about the 1st or 2nd or 3rd of the 7th month. After shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] festival the first night was spent at Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]. We had a lot of things and we divided them into three parts and the miser from the following three shiga had to come to carry them to Yangbajen. These three shiga were Gyeba [Tib.?] Shangdrö and Nangbar [Tib. རྣང་པ་བ྄]. It was part of their tax. We paid these miser one dre of tsampa per day and sometimes tea and butter (for making tea). [the packed animals are provided by the miser]. When we stay at Gyeba Shiga, the miser had to do work for us like tayog and the thabyog, we paid them 1 dre of tsampa a day. Because this was above the normal tax obligation of miser. It was an extra job which they couldn't refuse, but since it was extra we paid a little bit. They had to do this twice; once when going and once when coming back. The tsampa we need and other things were arranged by Gyeba Shiga. And then the miser from the 3 areas carries it all up to Yangbachen. Coming back the Yangbachen nomads have to carry the things to Drepung. But later some of the miser discussed this and changed the system. Yangbajenba took things from Gyeba Shiga to Yangbajen and back and then the 3-shiga miser took the goods to Drepung. The way the corvée carrying work operated was that Yangbajen carried from Gyeba to Nyenrong [Tib. གཉན་རོང] and then from Nyenrong to Kyangru [Tib. རྐྱང་རུ]. There were about 50-60 pack animals when we go there. When coming back, about 80-90 pack yaks was needed. So the Nyendrongpa took the load to Kyangru and then stayed there because the grass was good. On the return trip, the Kyangpa paid the Nyenrong people to carry the things back on their behalf.   

**Q:**  What did you take when you go there?   

**A:**  At this time we also carried up barley, tea, tsampa, flour and khata.   

**Q:**  Was this for trade?   

**A:**  No. It was for giving the miser. And for trade, there was the forcing into buying [Tib. འབམ་ཚོང་སྤུས་སྒྱུར] where we sell a package of worse tea produced from Tsöna for probably 1 khe of butter. Each khata was sold for 3 dre of dried cheese and there were 60 khata.   

**Q:**  This was like the "Patriotic Donation Grain" [Tib. རྒྱལ་གཅེས་གཞུང་འབྲུ], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What do you take back from the nomads?   

**A:**  We take butter and dry cheese for the forcing into buy.   

**Q:**  So there are two kinds of things you get from the miser. One is the actual tax on animals, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and the other was forcing into buying though it was not a big amount that might be fixed from the early times. I think that in the past the price for tea might be expensive, but the tea might be good quality.   

