# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0116.01  
##  : with Ding Yuanfa  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ding Yuanfa  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 48  
**Date of Birth:**   
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ding Yuanfa was a factory worker at the Large repair factory in Tibet. In this interview, he discusses entering Tibet in 1964 and what the living conditions, atmosphere and people were like then. He discusses his job at the repair factory and what they did there. He also discusses his experience with the two factions during the Cultural Revolution, their opinions, how their weapons were made and the fighting that occurred between the two sides. Additionally, he talks about his retirement and how it is paid for, but also the difficulty in paying for people’s retirements given the current (at the time of the interview) financial problems of the factory and many Tibetan enterprises.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0116_01/H_0116_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What is you last name?   

**A:**  Ding.   

**Q:**  What about the first name?   

**A:**  Yuanfa.   

**Q:**  Ding Yuanfa?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  When did you enter Tibet?   

**A:**  1964.   

**Q:**  1964? You stayed in this factory after you entered Tibet, didn't you?   

**A:**  Yeah, I always stayed here.   

**Q:**  What were you doing before you entered Tibet?   

**A:**  I was a student before I entered Tibet.   

**Q:**  Where did you study?   

**A:**  At my birthplace.   

**Q:**  Where is your birthplace?   

**A:**  Hubei province.   

**Q:**  What were you studying then?   

**A:**  Machinery control.   

**Q:**  How many people were there with you when you were allocated to this factory?   

**A:**  About 20 to the "Large repair factory."   

**Q:**  Before you entered Tibet, how did you feel about it at that time?   

**A:**  Well, in Tibet, there was only one street called People's Road. And it was full of bumps and holes.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Of course, at that time, we were all well-behaved. We worked in the large repair factory. Except for three factories like the large repair factory and the knitting mill, all other places were empty. When , all other places were empty.   

**Q:**  Right. Did you enter Tibet by your own wish or were you sent by the government?   

**A:**  By my own wish. I brought my family here.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  At that time, my relatives were already here.   

**Q:**  Who are they?   

**A:**  My uncle.   

**Q:**  Ok, uncle. Why did you want to come into Tibet at that time? What did you feel?   

**A:**  At that time, I was young. I was about 20 years old.   

**Q:**  How did you feel then?   

**A:**  I thought that I would look and see what on earth does Tibet looks like. At that time, my relative had brought my wife here. It happened that there were some employment opportunities. So she worked here.   

**Q:**  Where did she work then?   

**A:**  My wife . She came from Wuhan.   

**Q:**  How did you feel when you first worked here in Tibet? Did you feel that it was a bleak and wild land?   

**A:**  Right. Especially on the road; there was Gobi desert. At that time, there were no planes. Some people passing by said that the Gobi desert is really bleak and barren.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Compared with our south region, the Gobi desert is really different.   

**Q:**  Yeah, it is quite different.   

**A:**  When Caidan came, at first, there was nothing different. But when we were changing tires at Budong, she suddenly felt sick.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  Then she had altitude reaction.   

**Q:**  Yeah, altitude reaction. Where did it happened?   

**A:**  Before Budong.   

**Q:**  Before Budong?   

**A:**  It is just after Kunlun Mountain pass.   

**Q:**  Ok, the Kunlun Mountain pass.   

**A:**  It is close to Wudaliang.   

**Q:**  Ok, Wudaliang.   

**A:**  And the altitude reaction lasted until she arrived in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa? They came with you in the same truck or not?   

**A:**  No, we came separately.   

**Q:**  All right.   

**A:**  We all have altitude reactions. At first, we felt nothing, but soon we began to feel it.   

**Q:**  What was the major symptom at that time?   

**A:**  We mainly felt dizzy.   

**Q:**  Dizzy?   

**A:**  And we could not eat anything. But after we came into Lhasa, we felt much better.   

**Q:**  When you came into Lhasa, did you feel that it is different than what you thought before?   

**A:**  Yeah, it was quite different. At that time, we thought that since it was a provincial capital it should be good. But when we came into Lhasa, it looked so small. When you passed the Potala Palace, the Cultural Palace had a few houses.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  And the post office had not many houses too. Only in the People's Hospital, were there some houses.   

**Q:**  Ok   

**A:**  And the revolution work office had some houses too.   

**Q:**  Who was the first Tibetan you knew?   

**A:**  The first Tibetan? Let me see. I cannot recall.   

**Q:**  How did you feel about Tibetans? I mean, could you see Tibetans in your hometown?   

**A:**  No, I could not see them. There were no Tibetans in my neighborhood. Of course, I saw them. But I did not get in touch with them.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, I lived in the Traffic Bureau. There was no enclosing wall there. The wire fence was set up later. At first, the place was open.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  The place was right here. But now all of them have been dismantled. At that time, When you put things outside, no one would come to steal them. At that time, the general mood was so good.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  In general, when you dry something outside or put something outside, no one would come for them. There was no enclosing wall at that time. Anyone could get into it at any time.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  No one stole them. At that time, there was a lot of copper behind the spinning workshop. No one stole it too. At that time, the general mood of our society was quite good.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  The copper was just piled up there. But now, if there was still so much copper, it will be gone immediately.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  No one stole it or touched it. And the enclosing walls were built later. No one ever went there to bring something home.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  The general mood was quite good. And occasionally, the vendors came to sell chickens, eggs or butter. They never brought anything out too.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, the relationship between Tibetan and Han people was quite good.   

**Q:**  Good.   

**A:**  There were few conflicts between them. In the workshop, there were some Tibetans too. And the relationship between them was quite good. Especially, old retired comrades like us often went to each other's home. Since we lived together, when the Tibetans celebrated New Year, we kept in touch with each other too. The relationship was quite good at that time.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Right, all of us left the post.   

**Q:**  Did they go back to inland, or were they transferred to inland or retired?   

**A:**  Some went back to inland. Some were transferred. They all went back.   

**Q:**  What was your major before you entered Tibet?   

**A:**  I had no major. I was just a student.   

**Q:**  You graduated from college or somewhere else?   

**A:**  I graduated from middle school. I had no major.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  I learned quite a lot here. At that time, those people from Shanghai knew many things.   

**Q:**  At that time, who had stronger technical background?   

**A:**  People from all over the country. But in comparison, people from Shanghai generally knew more.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  They were older than us. Most of them were more than 60 years old. They retired earlier.   

**Q:**  In 1960s or 1970, some people came from 18th army corps [Ch. 18 jun]   

**A:**  There were some people from the 18th army, but the number was not big. Since they were soldiers at that time, they did not know much about technical issues. They mainly worked as guards, etc. Some worked as cadres.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Later in 1960s, those cadres in the organizations were all technical personnel from all over the country. In our large repair factory, there were 4 workshops.   

**Q:**  10 workshops.   

**A:**  No. 4 workshops. One workshop was for repairing big trucks. One workshop was for repairing small cars. Our workshop was responsible for suppliers. And the other workshop was responsible for making oxygen. At that time, the personnel in our workshop reached a peak of 180 people.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  We used a lathe to cast and mould the parts by ourselves.   

**Q:**  What did you do in the large repairing factory?   

**A:**  I mainly did fine processing of the car parts.   

**Q:**  Car parts? That means you were in the parts-suppliers workshop?   

**A:**  Yeah. We made car parts.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, we first made small parts. Later, we made bigger and bigger parts.   

**Q:**  Were you accustomed to the place here when you first arrived here?   

**A:**  At that time, I was young. And I became accustomed to the environment soon. To be frank, the living condition were bad. We lived in tents.   

**Q:**  In tents?   

**A:**  Yeah, we had nothing when we came here. At that time, the conditions were hard for us. If you compared it with now, the conditions were too bad.   

**Q:**  . The great Cultural revolution started soon after you came, didn't it?   

**A:**  Yeah, the great Cultural Revolution started soon.   

**Q:**  Did it start in 1966?   

**A:**  Well, it started in 1966.   

**Q:**  Do you know in which month did it start?   

**A:**  I cannot recall which month.   

**Q:**  Do you know how it started in the large repairing factory at the very first beginning?   

**A:**  At that time, in the dinning room of our workshop (it was already dismantled), someone posted a big-character-poster there.   

**Q:**  Big-character poster? What was the content of the poster?   

**A:**  About the capitalist roaders. In our workshop, some cadres were capitalist roaders. In fact, as we reexamined them now, there was nothing special about them. It started from the Big-character poster.   

**Q:**  Did some students from colleges in Beijing come here?   

**A:**  Yeah, they came. They were from the Tibet nationality institute, Beijing University, Qinghua University. These students came here for liaison.   

**Q:**  How did they establish ties at that time? What was the method?   

**A:**  Well, they just came here to do some propaganda. They mainly come here to propagate something.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  I thought that they would come to our factory at that time. But they did not come very often.   

**Q:**  They came a few times?   

**A:**  Yeah, our place is an out-of-the-way place.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, when we went to Lhasa, we just walked. On Sunday, we used to go to the Xinhua bookshop. We went there to read books. There was no other entertainment at that time.   

**Q:**  Yeah, every simple.   

**A:**  At that time, we just liked to take a look at the books in the Xinhua bookshop. If we found something interesting, we bought one.   

**Q:**  Right. Then what happened later?   

**A:**  Later, in about 1967, there were two factions in Tibet.   

**Q:**  How did the two factions form?   

**A:**  At that time, one faction - the rebellion faction opposed the capitalist roaders. And another faction was the royalists. Afterwards, two factions were formed. After the two factions formed, I remember that it happened in February of 1967. I participated the Great Cultural Revolution. I know something about it.   

**Q:**  What happened in the February?   

**A:**  People from "Tibet Daily" seized the power.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  and another faction tried to fight for the power.   

**Q:**  When the power was seized, who controled the "Tibet Daily"?   

**A:**  the Revolt Headquarter.   

**Q:**  Is the faction that tried to get the power called the "Headquarter of the Great Alliance"?   

**A:**  Yeah, Headquarters of Great Alliance.   

**Q:**  Did the Headquarters of the Great Alliance try to seize the power from the revolt headquarters?   

**A:**  No, it tried to seize the power of the "Tibet daily". We were not clear about what happened.   

**Q:**  Why did they want to seize the power?   

**A:**  There were two factions. They fought for the same power. Well more than 30 years have passed (in 1967), so I cannot recall exactly. But I did know some. At that time, the army encircled (seiged) the place. And one week later, one faction collapsed because there was nothing to eat in the place.   

**Q:**  Which faction stayed in the place, Revolt headquarter or headquarter of great alliance?   

**A:**  People of Revolt Headquarter stayed inside.   

**Q:**  And they insisted not the let people of Headquarter of Great Alliance to come inside?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. And later, the army encircled the place.   

**Q:**  What did they do so that people of Revolt Headquarter could not get into it?   

**A:**  Nothing special. They just occupied the place. And later, the army encircled the place.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  And as a result, they had nothing to eat. A week later, they had to give up. And after they came out, the Revolt Headquarters basically collapsed. I remember that later the Revolt Headquarter rose up again after the People's Daily published an editorial named "national betrayal or patriotism." After they rose up in February, violence began.   

**Q:**  Violence began?   

**A:**  Yeah. The violence lasted until 1969. They fought for about two years.   

**Q:**  Two years?   

**A:**  Yeah. At first, they threw stone at each other.   

**Q:**  Stones?   

**A:**  And they used slingshots too. Later, the violence became more intense. Acts of smashing and grabbing appeared.   

**Q:**  What kind of people participated in the two factions at that time? In your factory, was the number of people who joined the Revolt Headquarter bigger or the number of people who joined the Headquarters of Great Alliance bigger?   

**A:**  In our factory, there were more people in the Headquarters of the Great alliance. There were less people in the Revolt Headquarters.   

**Q:**  Were you in Headquarters of the Great Alliance or Revolt Headquarters?   

**A:**  I was in the Revolt Headquarters.   

**Q:**  In general, who joined the Revolt Headquarter?   

**A:**  Generally, the Revolt Headquarter consisted of the masses.   

**Q:**  Masses? Were there more Tibetans or Han people?   

**A:**  They were about the same. Probably, there were a little bit fewer Tibetan people in the Revolt Headquarters. Because in general, the Revolt Headquarters had fewer people, the Tibetan people were fewer too.   

**Q:**  Fewer? And in the Headquarters of the Great Alliance, were there more Tibetans?   

**A:**  Yeah, more. In the Revolt Headquarters, there were fewer Tibetan people.   

**Q:**  After the formation of the two factions, do you know how one joined a faction? What was the procedure?   

**A:**  There was no special procedure. It all depended on your own wish.   

**Q:**  At that time, what drove you to join the Revolt Headquarters?   

**A:**  Several of my friends joined it, so I joined it.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  There was nothing special.   

**Q:**  At that time, what was the biggest difference between the two factions? They were mainly different in their views of something else?   

**A:**  Mainly in their views.   

**Q:**  What kind of views did the Headquarters of the Great Alliance hold?   

**A:**  In fact, for such mass movement, people just rushed headlong into mass action without any consideration. They knew nothing about it. Only later, did such movements became organized. In fact, there was nothing different. For example, the royalists also opposed capitalist-roaders. And in both factions, there were some cadres. They caught our cadres criticized them. And we caught their cadres and criticized them too.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  And later, we fought with each other. Things just happened like that.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  There were some cadres who did not join the Revolt Headquarters, but they tended to agree with its point of view. There were some cadres who did not join the Headquarters of the Great Alliance, but they tended to agree with its point of view. And people from the Headquarters of the Great Alliance came to arrest and criticize the cadres who agreed with us. We then went to there places to arrest and criticize the cadres who agreed with them. As a result, we fought with each other.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  It is funny.   

**Q:**  As I know, in the factory, there were fewer people from the Revolt Headquarters?   

**A:**  Yeah, fewer. But the difference was not big.   

**Q:**  As I know, people of the Headquarters of the Great Alliance could not stay in the factory. What happened?   

**A:**  Well, in the Revolt Headquarters, there were more young people. At that time, I was young. They were all ready to fight. But people of the other faction were more cowardly. Once the fight began, they ran away.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  So the Revolt Headquarters occupied the place. And at that time, organizations like Second Machinery Station (Ch. Er Ji Zhan #277) and the engineering truck teams had more people from the Revolt Headquarters.   

**Q:**  Right, more people of the Revolt Headquarters.   

**A:**  So once the fighting began, they came to assist us and we won the battle. It was just as simple as that.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, the Revolt Headquarters had more young people. These young people were in their twenties. They were brave in the fighting.   

**Q:**  Right. At first, did they use guns or ammunition?   

**A:**  No, they didn't use that at first. But the battle had to be escalated. And since we were in the factory, we were able to make guns and other weapons by ourselves.   

**Q:**  You made them by yourselves?   

**A:**  We had quite advanced technologies. We could make hand grenades, bombs and artillery shells. These factories could make these things although the weapons were not as good as those from the army.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Compared to the weapons from the army, our weapons were not up their standard due to insufficient technologies and worse materials.   

**Q:**  Where did you get the materials then?   

**A:**  We got the materials from our own factory. We had them. For example, we moulded and cast the hand grenades and installed a piece of wood, explosive dynamite and a detonating cap. Once you pulled the trigger, it exploded just like a real hand grenade.   

**Q:**  Right. Were you able to make guns?   

**A:**  We could not. We could make very simple ones. You know, they just looked like those shown in the movie "Tunnel Battle." They were useless because you could not take aim with them. We used these to threaten people.   

**Q:**  And you made some, didn't you?   

**A:**  Yeah, we made some. They were bad because they were not from professional factories. The bullets contained only explosive dynamite but no head. You were only able to shoot the bullet out. Although the gunshots sounded loud, it would not hurt anybody. We used them to frighten people.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  And once you made one shot, you could not put the second bullet into the gun again because it had swelled. They were useless.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  But the hand grenades were good. As a comparison, it was easier to make hand grenades. We could not make guns.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  We could not make artillery either.   

**Q:**  No artillery?   

**A:**  We made some artillery. But we hurt some of our own people instead of others on the streets.   

**Q:**  What happened?   

**A:**  They were manufactured according to design.   

**Q:**  Yeah, no standard.   

**A:**  We just made them according to available materials. We used whatever materials we had at that time. And we did not have good materials. The artillery pieces exploded quite often.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  They were almost useless.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  Hey, Song, come over here. . He was an old comrade. He knew a lot about it. Come over and sit here.   

**A:**  Song: Ok.   

**Q:**  You can sit with him.   

**Q:**  The artillery was useless too. But the hand grenade did work well.   

**Q:**  The hand grenades were good?   

**A:**  It was relatively simple (to make). Guns and artillery, however, were more difficult.   

**Q:**  You made guns and artillery? That indicated that the violence had already escalated. Do you still remember when that happened?   

**A:**  In 1978. No, in 1968.   

**Q:**  In 1968?   

**A:**  Yeah, it began in 1968.   

**Q:**  Do you know in which month?   

**A:**  Well, about May or June.   

**Q:**  May or June?   

**A:**  At that time, the fight had already escalated, and the Headquarter of Great Alliance had some guns.   

**Q:**  They had guns?   

**A:**  Yeah, they had real guns. They got the guns from the army. They had a good relationship with the army.   

**Q:**  Good relationship with the army?   

**A:**  They had good guns.   

**Q:**  How did they get the guns?   

**A:**  They grabbed them from the army.   

**Q:**  Why didn't the army stop them?   

**A:**  Well, they had a good relationship with the army. It looked like they grabbed the guns from the army openly, but in fact, the army gave the guns to them.   

**Q:**  In general, how many guns did they have at that time?   

**A:**  I remember... After a quite big battle, well, let me think. In general, our weapons were made locally. At that time, there were only two factories, the Mechanical Factory and the Large Repair Factory. Song, take a seat. Do not go. [Song, a visitor, arrived]  

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  We occupied both the Mechanical Factory and the Large Repair Factory. The Mechanical Factory made better weapons than us. For example, they made the Model 60 cannon.   

**Q:**  It was a small cannon?   

**A:**  Yeah, it was. The barrel was just short like this. Once you slide in a shell, it fired with a booming report. They made this kind of cannon quite well. The quality was better than those made by the Large Repair Factory.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  Ours had a lock at the gun breech. Once you pulled the rope, it pulled the trigger. We were able to fire the shell out, however, it did not work very well.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  I have tried it. I almost got killed by it.   

**Q:**  . What happened?   

**A:**  Well, at the gun breech, it was locked. And at the side, there was a rope connected with the trigger. Once you pulled the rope, the trigger pulled the spring to hit the fuse. And we probably added too much explosive dynamite. The gun breech flew towards me and just passed my head. So later, we dared not use it any more.   

**Q:**  . You were frightened to use it.   

**A:**  Yeah, it would be bad to hit our own people.   

**Q:**  Yeah.   

**A:**  So we made some cannons and used them several times. At that time, we occupied this place. And people of the Headquarter of the Great Alliance were stationed in Sera Monastery..   

**Q:**  Yeah, Sera Monastery.   

**A:**  There was a cave. You know there was a small hill near the village. We had reasons to make cannons at that time.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  That was because the cannon can hit (targets at) longer distances. At that time, that place was empty. There were no workshops. And we all ate in the dinning room. We ate together in the dinning room instead of in our own homes.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, it was an open ground. When we went to eat, they used the machine gun to shoot us, and one of our people was injured.   

**Q:**  One injured?   

**A:**  Because they injured one of our people, we decided to make cannons.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  We made the cannons and successfully fired them at their place.   

**Q:**  You shot over a hill?   

**A:**  Yeah, we bombarded right around the cave. You know, it was annoying that they used the machine gus to shoot you when you went there to eat. We could hardly escape from it.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  So we made the cannon. And it worked. After we bombarded them several times, they dared not to shoot at us again.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  Basically, the cannons were useless. We used them only for long distance. And later, since there were some problems with it, we dared not to use it any more.   

**Q:**  You quit using it?   

**A:**  Yeah. The gun barrel was too bad. But the hand grenade we made was quite good.   

**Q:**  Did you make a lot of them?   

**A:**  Yeah, we made quite a lot. And those were simple.   

**Q:**  So the Revolt Headquarters never got real guns?   

**A:**  We got real guns later. We grabbed them by ourselves.   

**Q:**  Where did you grab the guns?   

**A:**  We grabbed some from the army. We got only very few.   

**Q:**  Did you openly grab the guns like the other faction?   

**A:**  Yeah, we did the same. I was not clear about it. I did not participate in that act. I seldom used the real guns. I always used locally-made weapons.   

**Q:**  Local-made?   

**A:**  Ding: Yeah, we made them by ourselves. Those were used to threaten people. Otherwise, they were totally useless.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  And you could make the first shot.   

**Q:**  You were not able to fit the bullet into the gun for a second shot?   

**A:**  Yeah, we could not.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  Those local-made weapons were really bad. We also had some local-made rifle. In general, we had fewer guns.   

**Q:**  I: Fewer guns?   

**A:**  Yeah, the Headquarter of the Great Alliance had more guns. And these guns were all new.   

**Q:**  New?   

**A:**  We had a battle at that place. They had 13 people and we had only three. When we prepared to go to bed, suddenly they began to shoot.   

**Q:**  Did you get hurt?   

**A:**  No, I was not injured. And all of a sudden, they started to shoot at us. The bullets went through our house. These houses were already dismantles now.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  Many people never experienced these kinds of things except for the older people. Some of them hid behind the wall and trembled all over with fear.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  Then three or four of our young people went out to reconnoiter the situation. We had hand grenades. I had brought three or four hand grenades with me.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  At that time, we had a covered embankment near the house. We built this embankment by ourselves. And they took advantage of this embankment and set up an old machine gun there to shoot at us.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  Since we had no guns, we threw hand grenades at them. So we began the battle. They had heavy firepower. We only had local-made weapons. But they start to get afraid once battle began.   

**Q:**  So they ran away?   

**A:**  Yeah, they ran away.   

**Q:**  How long did the battle last?   

**A:**  About half an hour. They shot at us. But we did not get hit because we were familiar with the place.   

**Q:**  Yeah, you are familiar with the place.   

**A:**  And once we threw out the hand grenades to them, they were frightened. The hand grenades made by the army would explode in 3.8 seconds once you pull the fuse. In contrast, ours would explode in about 7 or 8 seconds. We were not confident enough to follow the standard of the army. So we increase the length of fuse.   

**Q:**  You increased the length of the fuse?   

**A:**  Yeah. We used the grenade to threaten people. Otherwise, if something went wrong, it would be too bad to hurt our own people.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Things made by the army were different from the local-made things.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In the beginning, we used an iron pipe. We made a hole here and put exploding dynamite, a detonating cap, a fuse and a thread into it. Then we sealed the other side. The first batch of grenades we made were even coarser. We had to ignite it to make it explode. Later, we developed some new methods so that once we pulled trigger, it would explode soon.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  In about 1967, no, in 1969, we planted mines around our place.   

**Q:**  Mines?   

**A:**  Yeah, but most of them were fake. Only a few of them were real. What is a fake mine? We connected a thread with a bottle. And it looked like real. When they saw these, they were frightened.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In fact, there was no detonating cap, nothing at all. There was only a line outside.   

**Q:**  Right. .   

**A:**  Well, it was just like that at that time. As long as they could not get inside, we felt good.   

**Q:**  They dared not come inside?   

**A:**  Yeah, they were frightened to do so. How did they know whether our mines were real or not?   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In fact, we deliberately showed the lines and water pipe to them. If these mines were real, we would plant them underground instead of outside.   

**Q:**  Right. And the mines were made by you?   

**A:**  Yeah, we made them by ourselves. We connected the mines with batteries. And once we switched the electricity on, they exploded.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, we were afraid to act too reckless because we could hurt our own people.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  And to tell the truth, there were more faked mines outside. When they saw these, they dared not to come here any more.   

**Q:**  Right. Then in general, the people of the Headquarters of the Great Alliance did not come back to factory in those several years?   

**A:**  They came back. Later, there were several movements such as the great union, the submission of weapons, etc. After these, they came back to work again. At that time, the two factions started to be united. They handed in their guns and came back. After a while, the two factions started to battle against each other again.   

**Q:**  Do you still remember the most intensive violence?   

**A:**  It could be in July 1977 .   

**Q:**  What happened?   

**A:**  They started the war. We did not prepare until the war started.   

**Q:**  What triggered the fight?   

**A:**  It was the same. They criticized our people and we criticized their people. Then we fought against each other.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  I remember that it was at about 12:00Am. I was just about to go to bed. Then they shot at us. But they hurt nobody. Then we went out to reconnoiter the situation. The battle lasted about half an hour. Then they had to withdraw.   

**Q:**  Withdraw?   

**A:**  Yeah, they withdraw to the mail room. That was the most intensive battle. They used machine guns.   

**Q:**  They had machine guns?   

**A:**  Yeah, they used machine guns, and we used only hand grenades.   

**Q:**  Hand grenades?   

**A:**  We divided into two groups. Covered by one group, the other group went out to explode the pillbox. With such a pillbox, it would be easier for them to shoot at us with a machine gun.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, the people from the Revolt Headquarters could not withstand the machine gun fire. Then we went there after we finished the fight here. And we covered them so that they were able to blow up the pillbox. When they were fighting, the other side had pillboxs and machine guns, so he went to cover for other Gyenlo fighters to destroy the pillbox.   

**Q:**  I: Ok.   

**A:**  At that time, there were four pillboxes around the Large Repair Factory. Right now, there is still one there.   

**Q:**  Is it a leftover from the rebellion?   

**A:**  Yeah, it is. That pillbox is made of mud bricks. It was a little high. At that time, they did not know how to blow up the pillbox, and they failed to blow it up. The explosive package was tilted. So instead of blowing up the pillbox, they blew up the houses on the other side. And the flying bricks and mud came over here and destroyed some of the houses here.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  They did not know how to do it. And they still knew nothing for the second try. They blow up the roof of that building. But the pillbox was still there.   

**Q:**  Were there any people on the roof?   

**A:**  No, there was nobody. At that time, we had to destroy the pillbox. Because of the machine gun and bullets, nobody could enter the factory. And we worried that if a battle happened again in the future, we would not work it out without destroying the pillbox.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Finally, we blew it up. It cost us three explosive packages.   

**Q:**  Three. . At that time, was there anybody killed during the fight?   

**A:**  No, nobody was killed in these several battles at the Large Repair Factory.   

**Q:**  I heard that at that time there was a Tibetan killed. Was it in Large Repair Factory?   

**A:**  No, not in the factory. He belonged to somewhere else. Outside of the Large Repair Factory, this happened more often.   

**Q:**  More often?   

**A:**  At that time, there was a woman called Wudi. She was from Beijing. She was transferred back to a civil organ of the Central Committee later. She was injured by people from our Large Repair Factory.   

**Q:**  What happened?   

**A:**  She went to the newspaper publishing house. At that time, her husband worked there. They had no vegetables to eat. At that time, there were not many house in the publishing house. There was quite a lot empty grounds. So she went there to pick up some wild edible herbs.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Then a bullet came from Ramoche and went through her leg.   

**Q:**  Leg?   

**A:**  Yeah, she was from our Large Repair Factory.   

**Q:**  She belonged to Large Repair Factory?   

**A:**  Yeah, we knew her.   

**Q:**  You knew her?   

**A:**  Yeah, she got injured at that time. In fact, we seldom killed people in the war inside Large Repair Factory.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Well, at least we all belonged to the Large Repair Factory. We did not really beat others heartlessly.   

**Q:**  In other words, you were not quite callous. Did you criticize the cadres severely?  

**A:**  Yeah, we did.   

**Q:**  How did you criticize them?   

**A:**  Well, we did not really beat them. We just put a mudguard on them . That mudguard was heavy. It was about 3 or 4 jin. Then we connected iron wires on it to let the cadres wear it. Then we interrogated them to confess their crimes. In the Large Repair Factory, we did not really beat people heartlessly like people did outside.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  In a word, if you criticized our cadres, we would criticize your cadres too.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  In general, the two factions had about the same human power.   

**Q:**  Right. At that time, did the battle happen during daytime or night?   

**A:**  Well, in the Large Repair Factory, both battles happened at night.   

**Q:**  Why at night?   

**A:**  I do not know. They instigated both battles. For the first time, they threw stones at us. At that time, they had no guns. Because we were not prepared, three of us were driven out.   

**Q:**  Three?   

**A:**  Yeah. We threw stones at higher places and they did the same thing at lower places. And they pushed toward us. We saw the bad situation and withdraw to the small hall. There was a small gate to the mountain.   

**Q:**  So you guys went out to the mountain?   

**A:**  Yeah, some of them went out. And several of us stayed.   

**Q:**  Then what did you do?   

**A:**  We went to the previous Xukesuo .   

**Q:**  Were there were some people of the Revolt Headquarters there?   

**A:**  Yeah. We crossed over the wall and went there. At that time, the place was quite empty. And the Xukesuo was under the charge of people from the Large Repair factory. At that time, the door was made of wood. So we pushed the door hard on this side. And they pushed on the other side. Because we had fewer people, we could hardly resist them. Then, some of our people went to the engineering truck team to ask for aid and they came over here to help us. Under a pincer attack, they fled out to the mountains.   

**Q:**  . You drove them out to the mountains?   

**A:**  Yeah, at first, they drove us out to the mountains, and later, we drove them out to the mountains.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  That was the first time. The second battle happened in July 1967.   

**Q:**  When did the first battle happen?   

**A:**  In February. I am quite sure about it.   

**Q:**  In which year?   

**A:**  In February of 1967. At first, we did not make preparation for their offence action. So they drove us out to the mountains. Then we organized people from other places and drove them out to the mountains too.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, we used stones and sticks.   

**Q:**  What about the second time?   

**A:**  They started the second time too. We did not know when the battle could happen. And then they set up a machine gun and shot at us. And we lost our bearings at first.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  So we sent out several young people to reconnoiter the situation. Because we were so close to each other, the battle started. At that time, we used hand grenades. As I crawled over there, I threw a hand grenade at them.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  When they saw the hand grenades, they began to withdraw. So we went inside. At that time, we had four young people. One bullet blew up the hat of the last guy of us. He was so frightened that he went back. We three went over the obstacle.   

**Q:**  Over the obstacle?   

**A:**  Yeah, over the embankment. We were quite familiar with the place. And we threw hand grenades at them. They used the machine gun to shoot at us. But they could not hurt us and we could not hurt them either.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  Hand grenades were quite useful, especially when we were close to each other. So they fled. And we came back. We used an illuminating light and confirmed that they went away. We did not chase them because they had guns.   

**Q:**  Yeah, you cannot do that.   

**A:**  You would get yourself killed if you chased them.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In the Large Repair Factory, there were only two battles.   

**Q:**  Did you stop working at that time?   

**A:**  In general, all work stopped.   

**Q:**  How long did you stopp work at that time? In which year did you stop working?   

**A:**  We worked intermittently. We stopped working when they started the battle. After we criticized a couple people, the government mediated the matter and the two factions became allied. Then they came back to the factory and worked again.   

**Q:**  Ok. At that time, inside your revolt headquarter, what was the relationship between people?   

**A:**  Well, inside our faction, the relationship between people was quite good. You had to live together, so that relationship must be good. At that time, there were people on guard.   

**Q:**  Guard?   

**A:**  Yeah, otherwise, if they came over to attack us, we would not stay well.   

**Q:**  Yeah.   

**A:**  And we took turns to guard at night.   

**Q:**  Nothing would happen during daytime?   

**A:**  In general, nothing happened during daytime.   

**Q:**  You just worried that they would come for a sudden attack at night?   

**A:**  Yeah.   

**Q:**  Were you afraid of death at that time?   

**A:**  We were young. I did not think of it. Let me tell you. At the first time, we did not have enough people. I remember that when we were at the place of Third Truck Team, suddenly people of the Headquarters of the Great Alliance encircled us. Then we fought with each other. I was stabbed by a bayonet. I was quite a coward at that time. Later, after I experienced more battles, I got used to it.   

**Q:**  . You were braver and braver?   

**A:**  Yeah, you could not withstand it at first because you had no experience.   

**Q:**  At that time, where are you wife and kids?   

**A:**  I had not married yet.   

**Q:**  You hadn't married?   

**A:**  Yeah, I was just about 20 at that time.   

**Q:**  . Since you were single, you do not have to worry about too much.   

**A:**  Yeah, most of us were single.   

**Q:**  Right. At last, how did your two factions unite? At what time?   

**A:**  In 1969. After the Revolution Committee was established, we united. No one fought again since that.   

**Q:**  No one fought?   

**A:**  Yeah, we held meetings and discussions. There was less fighting.   

**Q:**  Right. At first, who organized the Headquarters of Great Alliance? Was it the Military Propaganda Team?   

**A:**  No, it was the Military Control Committee.   

**Q:**  Were there any army men in the Large Repair Factory?   

**A:**  Yeah, there was a battalion stationed here.   

**Q:**  A battalion? Which battalion?   

**A:**  It belonged to the 11th division.   

**Q:**  11th Division?   

**A:**  The 11th Division practiced military control here. After that, we seldom mentioned union. The Revolution Committee selected some cadres without political problems and cadres from both factions and let them resume the production first.   

**Q:**  It means that the Control Committee selected cadres without problems from both factions.   

**A:**  Yeah, the heads of both factions.   

**Q:**  How about the guns?   

**A:**  We submitted them.   

**Q:**  What about your local-made guns?   

**A:**  We submitted them too.   

**Q:**  . You submitted the guns by your own wish or they forced you to submit?   

**A:**  No, we had to do it. If you did not do it, you will be notified to the public with a charge of holding weapons. So we submitted all the weapons.   

**Q:**  You submitted everything?   

**A:**  Yeah, at that time, people were honest. They obeyed the orders once they were issued. But people right now are not so honest anymore.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  You can see that at that time, when the people of the other factions left, we did not even touch their windows. For example, we were in the same faction. If I tried to touch the window of the other people, I would be criticized by my own comrades.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  So this is the fact. Although people fought with each other, they never tried to steal or rob other's properties.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  They never took a penny from the others. We had a battle at the Truck Department there. After the battle, they ran away and we went to that place to collect things. If the things were guns or other weapons, we simply had them. But if it was a watch, we would return it to the owner immediately. We did not want other people's things.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  What they propagated was totally wrong. I was quite clear about the truth because I experienced the battles myself. The so-called grabbing and looting was complete nonsense.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Well, we had to fight because of the existence of two factions. But they were only small fights. Without good weapons, it would be impossible to have a large-scale war.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  After the great union, people from the two factions became friends. The only difference was that they still belonged to their own faction. And there was still a gap between the factions.   

**Q:**  Right. After the establishment of the Control Committee, there was a movement called "clean up the class ranks." What was it?   

**A:**  Well, some old comrades often had problems. For example, in our place, some old comrades did something bad in the past. (For example) They drove for the Guomindang before. That was a minor problem. Some had done something for the Guomingdang.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In our production department, there was an old comrade.   

**Q:**  Old comrade?   

**A:**  He graduated from a military officer school before. After graduation, he was an associate professor probably in Wuhan. But he was not related to fighting in war at that time. He was a technician.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  So he got criticized in the Large Repair Factory.   

**Q:**  He was criticized?   

**A:**  Yeah, actually, it was the same thing. Those people who were involved with the Guomingdang before, or took or sold opium before were in trouble. We could easily find their problems from the archives. We often criticized them about their past problems.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  For example, if we belonged to different factions, I would find your problem and want to criticize you, and your faction would not be able to protect you. So we beat you hard to make you confess something. In fact, there was nothing serious.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  That was about the "clean up the class ranks." Generally, young people did not have serious problems. As long as they explained what they did in the Great Cultural Revolution, they would have no trouble.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In 1977, I traveled on duty. They brought me back to make an explanation.   

**Q:**  where did you go to?   

**A:**  I went to Yanan.   

**Q:**  Yanan.   

**A:**  I went there to purchase something for the Large Repair Factory. And they brought me back.   

**Q:**  What happened?   

**A:**  Well, I just made explanations.   

**Q:**  They had doubts about your previous acts?   

**A:**  At that time, there was so-called "three points."   

**Q:**  What were the "three points"?   

**A:**  I cannot remember them.   

**Q:**  Did they just ask you to confess your actions in the Great Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  Yeah, they asked what I did and how I did things in the Great Cultural Revolution. At that time, someone exposed my previous actions. It made me really confused.   

**Q:**  What was wrong?   

**A:**  He said that I stole a 500 jin pig during the Great Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  A 500 jin pig?   

**A:**  I said that I absolutely never did it. And they did not believe in me no matter how I explained. I said that if it was just a chicken, I could just take it with me. But with a 500-jin pig, I could not fetch it easily.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  If I did it, it would be certain that more people would see what I did. I asked them to get that guy to confront with me instead of letting him lie at the backstage.   

**Q:**  Right. Then what happened later?   

**A:**  It turned out to be a lie. Finally, nothing was wrong.   

**Q:**  Did you know who accused you?   

**A:**  No, I did not. Well, it happened like this. At that time, the newspaper publishing house belonged to our faction. A technician and I spent 1 Yuan 08 fen (cents) to get a 100-jin pig from there. It was hard for us to get the pig back. However, there was a trench between our place and the publishing house so we came back through the trench. But the pig was really bought by us.   

**Q:**  Right. . And they thought that you stole a pig from somewhere?   

**A:**  Yeah. At that time, most people of the Headquarters of Great alliance had left. And people of the Revolt Headquarter had no meat to eat. So we tried to distribute 3-jin of pork to everyone.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  We collected the money later, and returned the amount to the lender. We had a dinner party with the pig's head, pork legs and pork tripe. I could not understand why someone rumored that I stole a 500-jin pig.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  That was impossible. I said that I could not get (handle) the 500-jin pig only by myself.   

**Q:**  So you bought the pig so that the people of the Revolt Headquarters could get some pork?   

**A:**  Yeah, every person could get 3-jin pork. But they had to pay for the meat. The pig cost 150 Yuan. Once we collected all the money, we had to return the money to the other party (They owed some money to the publishing house).   

**Q:**  Right. At that time, when there were two factions, what about your salary?   

**A:**  Well, we got salary the same as before.   

**Q:**  Did the Revolt Headquarters pay the salary to the people in Revolt Headquarters only, or your factory pay everyone?   

**A:**  Our factory paid everyone if people were here. Otherwise, if they were outside, the Revolt Headquarters would pay people in the Revolt Headquarters and the Headquarter of the Great Alliance would pay their people.   

**Q:**  But the money came from the country?   

**A:**  Yeah, from the country.   

**Q:**  And the salary was paid monthly?   

**A:**  Yeah. The Large Repair Factory had a lot of money in the bank. It was quite rich. .   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  During the Great Cultural Revolution, although we did not work during those several years, the Large Repair Factory still had several million in the bank. It was quite rich. So the monthly salary was not out of the question.   

**Q:**  How about your salary?   

**A:**  At that time, our salary was not high. Mine was just about 60 yuan.   

**Q:**  But at that time, it was already relatively high.   

**A:**  Yeah, it was high. And the most advanced technicians got about 100 Yuan.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  Our head of the factory's salary was about 140 Yuan. The salaries were generally not high.   

**Q:**  Right. Was 60 Yuan enough for your living needs?   

**A:**  At that time, it was enough. We spent about 16 or 17 yuan every month. And we ate at the dinning hall. We also planted some vegetables by ourselves. At that time, the living expenses were not high.   

**Q:**  Not high. Was it difficult to get into the city at that time? Were you required to wear a sleeve badge at that time?   

**A:**  Ding: At that time, we generally did not wear sleeve badges. At first, the Revolt Headquarters distributed the sleeve badges (identifying their group).   

**Q:**  What was on the badge?   

**A:**  "Revolt Headquarters." I do not remember well as I did not wear it. It was not necessary. At that time, there were not many people in Lhasa. We knew each other very well.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  It was not necessary to wear it. Our region was at the Finance and Commerce Compound. In the past, there was a Renming (People's) Road. And the regions behind the Finance and Commerce compound all belonged to Revolt Headquarters, including the People's Hospital and the Publishing House. And the other side, like the city government, belonged to the Headquarters of the Great Alliance. You could not go to the other faction's place if you did not want to be beaten.   

**Q:**  So you didn't dare to go to the place of the other faction?   

**A:**  Yeah, we dared not.   

**Q:**  Who had the bigger area in Lhasa, the Headquarters of the Great Alliance or the Revolt Headquarters?   

**A:**  In Lhasa, the Headquarters of the Great Alliance controlled more areas. The Revolt Headquarters only conrolled the north and west suburbs.   

**Q:**  North and west.   

**A:**  In the city, the Revolt Headquarters did not have much area. They only got the places behind Ershi and the People's Hospital.   

**Q:**  right.   

**A:**  The Revolt Headquarters only had the People's Hospital, the Publishing House and the Post Office. There were not many houses there. We had only four organization.   

**Q:**  What about the Bajiao Street?   

**A:**  It belonged to the Headquarter of the Great Alliance. And the regions near Bajiao Street all belonged to the Headquarters of the Great Alliance. The Headquarters of the Great Alliance had more place in the city.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the Dazhao Temple and Bajiao Street, a big battle happened there. When did it happen?   

**A:**  It happened in 1967. On June 7th of 1967, it happened.   

**Q:**  Do you know something about it?   

**A:**  I did not participate in that violence so I do not know much about the details. I heard that they had some fight with army soldiers and a lot of people of the Revolt Headquarters died.   

**Q:**  A lot of people of Revolt Headquarters died at that time?   

**A:**  Yeah. the Headquarters of the Great Alliance occupied the Dazhao Temple. And possibly, the people of the Revolt Headquarters took a charge at the Dazhao Temple. I do not know much detail, because I was not there at that time.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  We controlled the north side.   

**Q:**  What about your place?   

**A:**  It was relatively safe because the Revolt Headquarters occupied the whole north side.   

**Q:**  And the west suburb also belonged to the Revolt Headquarters?   

**A:**  Yeah.   

**Q:**  The Headquarters of the Great Alliance owned the majority within the city, didn't it?   

**A:**  Yeah, it did. We seldom entered the city. We usually stayed in our place/areas. At that time, if we went to Sera Temple, we could encounter them.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  We seldom entered the city.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  We could not lose control of this place. We had to defend this place with local-made guns and cannons.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  We seldom entered the city. We stayed in the north suburb. We had a battle before. After we used cannons, we drove them out of this place. And we united with each other.   

**Q:**  When you united with another group, how did you do it? Did you send someone out to ask for aid?   

**A:**  Well, we must communicate with each other. Otherwise, it would be bad if they fired at our place.   

**Q:**  Did you us telephones?   

**A:**  No, we had no telephone. We just sent out a person and told them where our place was so that they could shoot the opponent's place.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In fact, the shells were for war exercises. There was nothing in them. We just brought some here and they became frightened.   

**Q:**  After you experienced the Great Cultural Revolution, what was the most difficult thing in this period for you?   

**A:**  Well, the living conditions were hard.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  We did not have food.   

**Q:**  No food?   

**A:**  In the previous Materials Department, there was a battalion stationed there. When we had nothing to eat, we began to eat tsamba ( a Tibetan food of roasted and ground highland barley). We ate it for a while, but several days later, we could hardly stand.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Then we went to the army and hit our bowls . And they gave us food.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  They dispatched a truck and brought some grain to us. The grain was from the temple. And the Headquarters of the Great Alliance controlled these temples. So the army went there and got some grain out.   

**Q:**  So at that time, in general, the Headquarters of the Great Alliance controlled the grain storage places?   

**A:**  Yeah.   

**Q:**  Then people of the Revolt Headquarters really had a hard time with their livlihood.   

**A:**  Yeah, they had not enough food to eat. Well, you can eat tsamba for a couple of days, but you could not live with it alone.   

**Q:**  What about the vegetables?   

**A:**  We almost had no problems with vegetables because we planted some.   

**Q:**  You organization planted them?   

**A:**  No, our workshop planted them. We had no problem with vegetables. The only problem was the shortage of meat.   

**Q:**  So the army went into the city and fetched some grain for you?   

**A:**  Yeah, they did it. Otherwise, if we ate with them, they would be short of grain too. They had the privilege to get grain.   

**Q:**  Right. When you recall your own experience in the past, what was the most significant thing in your life?   

**A:**  In these several years, after the opening and reforming, things changed greatly in Lhasa. We could see these changes easily.   

**Q:**  Yeah.   

**A:**  Ding: For example, in the past, there was almost no buildings on the north side. But right now, it is full of buildings. In comparison, the development in the north side was the slowest because it had a lot of factories. In these several years, factories did not have good economic situation.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  These enterprises have become old now. In the past, we used to work extra hours. As you can see, we overhauled 70 or 80 large trucks every year. For small trucks or cars, we had to work extra hours too.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  But now, we have fewer cars to repair.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for this situation?   

**A:**  Well, there are a lot of car repairing facilities.   

**Q:**  More repairing facilities?   

**A:**  Yeah. In the past, only the Large Repair Factory repaired cars and trucks. At that time, it was difficult to find a place to buy Daqianmeng cigarettes so when they came for repair work, they would give us several packs of Daqianmeng cigarettes. But we still needed to pay for the cigarettes. For example, I was a repair technician. You came here with a car to be repaired. If you want me to do it faster, you should present me some cigarettes besides the normal labor fees. And we paid 4 Yuan for a carton of cigarette.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, they had to give us some benefit to repair their cars. But right now, it never happens any more.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  For a company, it was difficult for it to change direction. And it was difficult for it to changes projects too.   

**Q:**  Difficult?   

**A:**  For example, to repair cars, you need technicians, instruments and garages. They all cost money. Since these things were relatively stable, people all know how to do it. But now, it is difficult to change your projects.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**Q:**  When did you retire?   

**A:**  I retired in 1998.   

**Q:**  In 1998. That means you retired after the salary reform.   

**A:**  Yeah, after that, I did not work any more. Those people still worked in the past several years after their retirement, but they did not do it any more since last year. And the salary was fixed after your retirement since that time.   

**Q:**  What is your salary now?   

**A:**  Aa little more than 1000 yuan.   

**Q:**  More than 1000 yuan?   

**A:**  1100 yuan. Mine is relatively high. Most of us have about 600 or 700 Yuan.   

**Q:**  600 or 700 yuan? Did you feel that you lost something because you entered Tibet, because if you stayed in inland, you could have had better living conditions and some other things?   

**A:**  Well, it is not necessary to consider these kinds of things any more. I would say that I did not regret coming here. It was fairly good here.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  I had good relationship with the cadres and comrades. When I went back to my home in inland recently, I could not get accustomed to it.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  Here, I was used to living together. We went to each other's homes, did some shopping and played majong together. The relations are harmonious no matter whether you are a Han or Tibetan. As you can see, several of my old comrades retired too. I often go to their homes to chat.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  Now I did not go to Large Repair Factory any more because I retired. However, I still go to some comrade's homes there. In inland, they did not have such customs. They lived by their own and seldom greeted each other even when they were neighbors.   

**Q:**  Right. This is true especially for people living in cities. They are too busy.   

**A:**  I think that Tibet is great. It is better than inland in every aspect. As you can see, in inland, there are more people. And more people became old. I have about a 1000 yuan salary in Lhasa. It was relatively high compared with inland.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  For example, those older comrade in their 60s or 70s who went to factories earlier than me got less than me. They got about 300 or 400 yuan. The salary in inland was not high. After I finished up with my houses, I went back to inland and found the salary in inland had became higher. But in general, 1000 Yuan is relatively high. As you can see, in our Large Repair Factory, most retired workers only got 500, 600 or 700 yuan.   

**Q:**  Right. Where is you house after your retirement?   

**A:**  Well, my wife was from the Fourth Middle School. They collected money and purchased 50 mu of area and built about 270 suites in the east of the city. And she got one apartment there.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  So there is no problem with housing.   

**Q:**  You will live in the east of city after you go back?   

**A:**  Yeah, it should be finished soon. It has been two years since they started the work. In Lhasa, the institutions are relatively better than enterprises. The enterprises cannot provide these to their people. You know, they want to build some houses too, but they have no money.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  But for institutions, the government will give some money. Like the house we got, the institution subsidized us 50,000 yuan and we paid about 80,000 or 100,000 yuan. We were able to pay this amount. But if you asked for more, we did not have that much.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  And those people in enterprises had no such opportunities.   

**Q:**  Did your wife retire?   

**A:**  She will retire soon. She is on vacation right now. After she comes back, she will retire immediately.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  She is 52 years old. She worked in 1960s.   

**Q:**  And for people in enterprises, they were not able to pay for houses.   

**A:**  Yeah, they could not. For our house, it has 126 square meters. We pay 100,000 at most. And my wife's institution subsidized us 50,000. The Large Repair Factory was only able to give me 20,000.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  The enterprises did not have enough money. It really wants to help us, but the problem is that it has no money. And the workers were annoyed by that too. It was still in debt. The Large Repair Factory has several dozen million in loans to be repaid.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  The economic situation in enterprises was too bad.   

**Q:**  Yeah, I agree. Recently, I always interviewed those old comrades from enterprises and I felt the same thing too.   

**A:**  As you can see, it was time to increase salary by 2.4%. But the enterprises could not realize it. Those retired comrades could not get the increase.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  And those early-retired people still got 600 or 700 yuan. It was not high with 600 or 700 yuan. The living conditions have changed now.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  The enterprises have hard time right now. Tibet's geographic position is not favorable.   

**Q:**  Right. And it hasn't well-developed commerce.   

**A:**  Yeah, it hasn't. But in inland, we could only say that there were a few good enterprises. Most of them had hard time too. Tibet's institutions have one advantage -- the government would provide some financial aid.   

**A:**  I worked since 1964 and my wife worked since 1969. Before my retirement, my salary was used to be higher than hers. But right now, hers is much higher than mine.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  You know, she got several increase recently. But mine is fixed since my retirement. The enterprises had too many burdens.   

**Q:**  Yeah, too many burdens.   

**A:**  For example, in our Large Repair Factory, there were several hundred people. How could it give 50,000 Yuan to each persone? It has no money. It could not provide this amount of money even it sold all of its properties.   

**Q:**  How many workers still work in the Large Repair Factory?   

**A:**  There are not many workers right now. There are about 200 people at most.   

**Q:**  200 people?   

**A:**  And there are about 500 or 600 retired people.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  It was an old enterprise. The burden was too heavy.   

**Q:**  But it could not simply cast them off because these old comrades constructed the factory in the very first beginning.   

**A:**  Yeah, they established the construction in Tibet. At that time, they had little payment, but worked hard. We were really annoyed by the situation of our factory. It had no money.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  I remember when I was head of the spinning workshop, our yearly output value was more than 1 million. But even with 1 million output value, our net profit was 100,000 at most. Right now, the output value is only between 100,000 and 200,000, so it could bardly pay salary to its employees.   

**Q:**  Right. And how is the situation for the big-truck repairing factory and the small-car repairing factory in Tibet?   

**A:**  Now, the economic situation for car repairing has became worse.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Well, there were several reasons. The first reason is the lagged technology. Some technicians were transferred and some went back to inland and some retired. The other reason is there is a difference between state-owned companies and privately-owned companies. There are some sales commissions involved. For example, when you came here for repairing and you spent 1000 yuan, these people could issue a bill of 1500 though you actually paid 1000 yuan. But in state-owned companies, who will fill the difference of 500 yuan. They were not allowed to do this.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  In our factory, when you actually spent 500 yuan, we will give you a bill of exactly 500 Yuan. There is no sales commission for you to take. The other reason is that since the old comrades have retired, young people could not master the technologies in time.   

**Q:**  They could not master the technologies?   

**A:**  Yeah, they could not. You probably do not know them. There were several old comrades in our factory before. They have quite good at repairing trucks. Now they are in their 60s or 70s. They all retired and some of them were transferred to inland. They were really good. The remaining young people could not succeed in having their skills.   

**Q:**  Right. It is real trouble if they could not be worthy successors.   

**A:**  Yeah. In privately-owned companies, they could give certain sales commissions, but here, we could not do this.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  If you are better in technology, you can survive without sales commissions. But right now, even your repairing technology is worse than others, so you are in big trouble.   

**Q:**  Yeah, such enterprises will die out soon.   

**A:**  Right. Sigh. It used to have such a huge garage.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  We were annoyed by the bad situation. Right now, not only the Large Repair Factory, but almost all enterprises are in a bad situation.   

**Q:**  So right now, all enterprises in Tibet have problems?   

**A:**  Yeah, they all have no way out.   

**Q:**  And do you feel that this is a difficult situation?   

**A:**  Yeah, really difficult. However, if you can set up some new projects here, things maybe will improve.   

**Q:**  New projects?   

**A:**  But that is difficult too. Tibet has a bad geographic position. The temperature is low and we lack certain kinds of materials. For example, they set up a steel rolling mill. The technology was available from the USA. It was easy to master it. But the temperature was a problem. At that time, there was no electricity in Lhasa. Well, Lhasa had electricity in 1993. We got all insulation materials from inland. In the reduction compartment of the furnace, the bricks from inland worked well. But ours did not. Those bricks are as expensive as 1000 yuan per ton. So although we could make some steel, the cost was too high. We made several hundred tons of steel at that time. The bricks used in the chamber of the furnace are called Gaolu Bricks.   

**Q:**  Ok, Gaolu Bricks.   

**A:**  At that time, it cost more than 1700 Yuan per ton. In inland, they can use the bricks for 100 batches. And we could only use them for about 20 batches. You know why. We smelt steels at night. The temperature was high. In daytime, we stopped and the temperature in the furnace went down and the bricks cracked. Once they cracked, they fell apart piece by piece. However, in inland, they keep the furnace running 24 hours a day. And the temperature in the furnace increased or decreased slowly. So the conditions for the project were not favorable. But if you do not use those kind of bricks, the cost for bricks from inland is too high. And the shipping is not convenient. You will certainly lose money that way.   

**Q:**  Right.   

**A:**  At that time, we used locally-made furnace to make steel. We could only get bad quality steel from such furnaces. That kind of steel won't work because it was not made by certain standard procedures.   

**Q:**  .   

**A:**  For example, in the furnace, if you just put iron mineral inside without any other things, how can you make good steel? In our case, when we made steel, we needed to supply oxygen. And how can we supply oxygen? We used certain kinds of minerals. In the later period, we needed to deoxidize. We used manganese, silicon or aluminum, etc. to get rid of the oxygen.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  when we poured the melted metal into a mold, at that time, we just poured the melt with the mould open to the air. We poured the melt through a small crevice. Because the melt was oxidized, the steel we made had some bubbles and chinks that we could not see. These were bad quality steel that wecould not use for buildings. They could be used for laying foundations.   

**Q:**  I am wondering whether the factory is still operating or not?   

**A:**  It is still operating. But it is now privately owned. Some people form inland contracted a project. That steels is bad quality because they do not use any other raw materials. If we used them to construct buildings, these buildings are going to collapse.   

**Q:**  So we could not use these kinds of materials in big buildings?   

**A:**  Yeah, we could not. We may use it in small houses with one or two stories. However, we could not use them for higher buildings.   

