# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0069.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
**Date of Interview:** 3 March 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས] was a monk official and a staff member of Trapchi. In this interview, he discusses his stay in Kalimpong, his investigation of members of the People's Association, and the disagreement between the members of the Dedön Tshogpa and Alo Chöndze. He gives details on the Tibetan Trade Mission, the Sikkim National Transport, the wool trade in Kalimpong, and also the overall increase in trade. He describes the exchange of money between banks, the celebration of the Dalai Lama's birthday, collecting donations after the Gyantse flood and also collecting donations for the Long Life Ritual. Additionally, he talks about the start of the Shangdab Hydroelectric Station, Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen, how the Chinese Trade Mission tried to make relations with the Tibetan Trade Mission, and his tour in China.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0069_07/H_0069_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  During this time, it is said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> too was consulted as to whether the Dalai Lama should stay or return. Do you remember this?   

**A:**  He must have been consulted because the oracle, Kungö Kuten [Tib. སྐུ་རྟེན], was there.   

**Q:**  So in 1957, where were you? When the Dalai Lama returned, you must have gone up to Gangtok and Nathula. Then you were staying in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, the trucks had to be received. They came from Jangsebshar and when they arrived, they were taken to Gangtok, disassembled, packed and carried by people on their shoulders. So I was just kept busy with that.   

**Q:**  So you stayed until 1959?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1959, Onkar was the one who used to buy our diesel oil. I think it was 3 or 4 in the evening—I was going to Onkar. I met Shelkar Chandzöla, the one I told you about. The one with crooked eyes who was a representative. I met him near the police station. I stopped the car and asked him where he was going, and he asked me where I was going. I said I was going to get some petrol. He said, "I doubt you need to get any oil." "Why?," I inquired. He said that in Lhasa, the people had risen and there was chaos. This guy knew things like that, you know. He knew these things from someplace like the Sikkim Political Office [Tib. འབྲས་སྤྱིའི་ཡིག་ཚང]. He said that a lot of things had happened. So I immediately phoned Phünkang Sey Kusho. I said that Chandzö la was saying these things to me. So this was big news, right? And Phünkang had connections with Sikkim. He replied that that was true and that even the Tibetans were shooting back. This Chandzö la knew things like that.   

**Q:**  In 1957, after the Dalai Lama returned [to Lhasa], was there anything special happening in India?   

**A:**  Then things seemed to have quieted down somewhat, so there wasn't anything special.   

**Q:**  You stayed in Kalimpong for a long time. What was the relationship of Alo Chöndze and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>? Were they together or did he have a separate organization?   

**A:**  At first, they were together, and later, there was some talk that there was a disagreement.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that—I don't know about Alo Chöndze, but Kungö Gyalo la, Phünkang, Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, and maybe Yuthok were there.   

**A:**  I think Yuthok was there.   

**Q:**  I don't know who the others were, but it was said that they were together. Later, they separated. Were they and Alo Chöndze all together in this? For example, Kungö Gyalo la went to Lhasa in 1952 and towards the end of 1952 [returned]. So if they started an organization, it must have been after that, around 1953. Was there anything in 1952?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't. It was as I have said earlier. Kungö Khenjung and I came in March 1954.   

**Q:**  You came together?   

**A:**  One or two days apart.   

**Q:**  So you came to do the Trade Mission?   

**A:**  Yes. So after Khenjung came, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> started. So it was like it started in 1954. Later, there was something about not getting along with Alo Chöndze.   

**Q:**  I will ask Phünkang in Gangtok.   

**A:**  Is she alive?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  She must be old.   

**Q:**  As I mentioned to you just now [before problems with the mike], what was the reason why the People's Association started?   

**A:**  According to what they were saying, after the Chinese came, the prices of food and commodities increased, and so everybody was having difficulties. "So we who are from the villages and Lhasa, whenever we talk, all the talk is about how items are becoming scarce and how expensive things are. The 17-Point Agreement has been signed between China and Tibet, and even when we look at the Agreement, it looks like there is scope for the people to express their concerns. In order for us to not have such difficulties, it may be best if we make a petition and expressed our concerns. So with this, we met once and more later, and since we felt the situation to be unbearable and because of these difficulties, we have made this petition."   

**Q:**  It seems that they met quite a few times.   

**A:**  Seems so. They met quite a few times and the news spread, and more and more people joined in.   

**Q:**  So they met, and what work did they do? Distributed leaflets and posted them?   

**A:**  No, they made a petition—a six point memorandum to the Kashag, and a copy of that was given to the Chinese staying at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>'s house bought by Sandutsang.   

**Q:**  Now, regarding the investigation, how did it start? There must have been something about doing an investigation. How did that come about?   

**A:**  The way that came about is—when the people did their activities, the Chinese seemed to have been very suspicious. They probably knew more clearly than us and must have sent spies all over the place. Then they approached the Kashag, it seems, saying that they were engaging in such activities. If they did that, then they were opposing the China (Ch. Zhongyang). So this had to be investigated. The Chinese told that to the Kashag and then the investigation began.   

**Q:**  You did mention it last time, but the place where the investigation was conducted—where was it, and can you describe for me what the place was like, how the seats were arranged, whether there was a table, and so on?   

**A:**  The investigation was done on the northeast side of the Tsuglagang. Towards the north of the east side, it is three or four stories [US 2nd Floor   Tibetan 1st Floor]. On the upper level—usually, there were rooms where the auditor's office, the Shibkhang Leygung [Tib. ཞིབ་ཁང་ལས་ཁུངས], and others met. The investigation was done in that area. The seats were arranged in this way: our Tibetan government officials faced north while the Chinese faced south. It was something like that.   

**Q:**  If we were to measure the rooms in terms of pillars, how many were there?   

**A:**  I don't remember very well, but the room where we met was, I think, two pillars. (This is equivalent to 26 feet by 9 feet). Once past the door, there were steps leading to the floor below. As I mentioned last time, just outside were the People's Association members who had come to make the petitions earlier and who had their names noted. They were asked to come in and one by one when they were investigated.   

**Q:**  When the investigation started, how did the talk begin?   

**A:**  The Chinese had said that the investigation must take place and all of that, right? Now, the investigators were in the office and the representatives of the People's Association were also there, right? There were six to seven of them. So they asked the Chinese how to best do the investigation.   

**Q:**  Before they even spoke? [Before the investigation.]   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese were the ones who said the investigation must take place, right? We had to do the investigation to satisfy the Chinese and it was not our wish, wasn't that it? So they consulted the Chinese as to how the investigation should proceed. The Chinese had done this. When asked who we should call first, they said to summon Jayan Dawa. He was quite famous at that time. This is what was asked; "Who brought you into this organization? How did you come to join the organization? When you were meeting, who else was there? You have made a 'pledge [Tib. གན་རྒྱ]' and when the 'pledge' was read and sealed and you put your name on it, who was the one who did that?" So it was like that.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese have those questions written down or what?   

**A:**  The various questions were arranged in order.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So they were asked in order.   

**Q:**  Were they written in Tibetan or Chinese?   

**A:**  They had it written in Chinese and we were asking how the procedure should begin. So they were asking—in the first question—"How did you join the organization?"   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. If our government officials were asking the questions, was the question list already there? Or did the Chinese say through the interpreter that you should ask this and that?   

**A:**  Through the interpreter, they had already told us the various questions. And so we would just ask them. And when the questions were asked, it was done calmly. Whatever we were told to ask was asked and we left it at that. It was the Chinese opinion that Jayan Dawa should be questioned first. And when he was summoned—he was an old man and he was calm and steady [Tib. བབ་བརླིང་བརྟན་པོ]—and the answers were appropriate and controlled [Tib. སྤམ་པོ]. Then towards the end, the Chinese calmly gave some advice through the interpreter, saying that it was not right to do such things. That there was an agreement between Tibet and China and that gradually, things would be made better. Things like that. Then Jayan Dawa left, right? The people that were to be questioned were summoned just outside, right? And so when they interrogated them one by one, they all probably knew what Jayan Dawa said. They did not put them under strict supervision.   

**Q:**  They were not strict with them and put them some place separately, did they?   

**A:**  No, they did not. At that time, they were not going to do something like that. They also did not also have the strength. I think it was sufficient for them if the association was done away. So they all said something similar. What they said was what I already told you last time. They said that "Nobody told us to join," that they all joined voluntarily. That "In our country, famine was coming and everybody was facing difficulties. So I joined on my own."   

**Q:**  When they were called, one of them was saying this?   

**A:**  They were all saying this. They were all being asked "Who told you to join?" and they replied that they found out on their own and that they had no choice but to voice their difficulties. And "There were such talks and we heard that some People's Association members were meeting, and since we heard that, we went to look for this meeting and then found it."   

**Q:**  So all of that was said was said during this occasion? The Chinese didn't just ask the Kashag and the Kashag sent people to their houses to question them, right?   

**A:**  That I don't know. No.   

**Q:**  So just at the office?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the representative came, were photographs taken?   

**A:**  Yes, photos were taken. It happened this way. The petition was handed to the Kashag and a copy was handed to the Chinese. The ones who went to the Chinese had their photographs taken. The Kashag would not have done that, right? There was no such custom. In the photo, they were all lined up in style with their rosaries hanging down from their hands.   

**Q:**  In the photo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, did they give the photos?   

**A:**  The photos were in Chinese hands. They were showing them. We saw them in the office.   

**Q:**  Did they take the photos together?   

**A:**  Yes, together. About four or five of them. They must have taken the petition and told them to stay for a while and took a photograph. So they took out their rosaries—like this—and took the photos.   

**Q:**  Now, regarding the decision, how was that done? They only gave some advice and they did not have to sign or guarantee anything, right?   

**A:**  No, nothing. At that time, a lot of their soldiers had not come and so they were not that harsh. It was a time when they were being meek. When the decision was made, they got a promissory guarantee [Tib. གན་རྒྱ] from them. As I mentioned last time, they said that this organization was against custom and so it would not do. That's the only thing they said.   

**Q:**  That's all?   

**A:**  Yes. That's all there was to say, right? And they handed them a guarantee saying that from that day on, they would not do such things.   

**Q:**  All of them?   

**A:**  There were not many. Just those who were summoned to appear. That day, they came with the guarantee, and I think the Kashag was there. The Chinese Zhang Jingwu and their kind were all there. At the Labrangtang [Tib. བླ་བྲང་སྟེང], on top of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>, there is a room called Nangsi [Tib. སྣང་སྲིད]. That was where the meeting took place.   

**Q:**  Which place? Labrangtang?   

**A:**  Labrangtang.   

**Q:**  Where is this place?   

**A:**  It's on the top of the Tsuglagang.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, everybody knows that.   

**Q:**  I see. After [your meeting], they [question not finished]   

**A:**  Our work was done. The guarantee was made and all was done, and we took the guarantee from them. So this work was done. So on that day, there was a greater number of representatives of both Tibet and China. I think we burned their documents. There were very few. Then both the Tibetan and Chinese governments gave advice. The usual thing about how this was not customary, and all of that stuff about how things were gradually going to improve [chuckle] and [how] development [would] take place. Things like that, and it was settled.   

**Q:**  What were their documents about?   

**A:**  There was almost nothing.   

**Q:**  The petition?   

**A:**  Yes, the copy of the petition, and there was a document that stated that they were expressing their concerns, the one with their names and signatures. That was the main document of the organization, right? After the organization was started, they made a 6-point petition which they handed to the Kashag, the copy of which was given to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  During this time, do you remember any songs about the People's Association?   

**A:**  Nothing like that. I don't remember.   

**Q:**  I thought it would be good to have some songs of the 1950-59 period.   

**A:**  I thought Gelek Rimpoche and company had something like that.   

**Q:**  I remembered something about the People's Association. It is said that they posted some papers in Lhasa and the Barkor. Since it was around New Years and soon the Mönlam was to occur, they could not voice their grievances at the moment. So later after all of these were over, then they were going to make a petition, and it is said that they posted papers to this effect.   

**A:**  This I can't tell you.   

**Q:**  I wanted to ask you something about Kalimpong. As you mentioned last time, you came with Kungö Khenjung. When you came to Kalimpong, where did you stay?   

**A:**  Tibet House.   

**Q:**  Where's that?   

**A:**  You know the Convent School? Below that.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see. Yes.   

**A:**  The Tibetan government had bought it a long time ago.   

**Q:**  You stayed there, and who else was staying there?   

**A:**  Khenjung was staying there. I was there. On one side, Nornang was there.   

**Q:**  When you say the Trade Mission, did you work in this?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did the Trade Mission do and who came to work in this? Was it like a representative of the government?   

**A:**  Yes, it was like a representative.   

**Q:**  Was it the Trade Representative?   

**A:**  On the letters and envelopes, it was written as Trade Mission. The Tibetan Trade Mission.   

**Q:**  Was there always one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and one lay official?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So what did the Trade Mission have to do?   

**A:**  When we had to send necessities for the government, they arrived at the Trade Mission. But mainly, we didn't have any kind of government representative in India. So it filled this need. It was quite recently instituted. It began around the time when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> went to the States. He had gone there and made a report, and I think in that there was talk of starting this office.   

**Q:**  I see. He went earlier and there was this thing about buying gold and all of that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. The first person to be appointed was Kungö Lobsang Tsewang la [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་དབང་ལགས] and Surkhang Kungö Depön.   

**Q:**  In 1950, what was Kalimpong like? What was there in Kalimpong? How did the Tibetans live? If they were traders, then what was the trade like? What was the place like?   

**A:**  It was a happy place. The cost of purchasing items was cheap. The Tibetans who had settled there a long time back, they were in the Panchayat Kyidu. This was the communal kyidu. Internally, there was Kayan Kyidu, the Packer's Kyidu.   

**Q:**  When you say Kayan Kyidu, you are referring to the Marwaris.   

**A:**  Those that the Marwaris knew well. The packers and those who worked for them.   

**Q:**  They were Tibetans?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And they called themselves Kayan Kyidu?   

**A:**  Yes, it's said that. I think they did quite well because the Marwaris used to give them a little bit of capital—send items with them—and they went to Tibet and traded. And it is said that they lived quite well. So in this way, there were different ways of making a living. In the 10th, 11th month, when winter began, the traders, the bigger ones [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Why winter?   

**A:**  Because summer is not supposed to suit the Tibetans. So during winter, the large traders dealt with wool. The wool would start arriving in the 10th-11th month and after that, the main masters [Tib. བདག་པོ] of the wool trades came. The main trade was wool. Now, you needed buyers, right? These were Marwaris, like Shriram Arjundas, Kaluram, and Kodamul. The prices differed every year, right? The profit was good and the traders took cloth and items needed in Tibet. On a smaller scale, there were a lot who brought a few tens of thousands to one to two lakh [rupees], like Lhasa Muslims. They also took items from India. Everybody hoped to be back by New Years.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrived, a lot came after 1951, and they must have had needed many items like building supplies, food, tents or whatever?   

**A:**  So that's why things like that were needed. Now, this was later.   

**Q:**  After they came, did trade increase a lot?   

**A:**  Yes. As I was telling you now, what we Tibetans had traditionally done, the large traders dealt with wool and the rest with smaller items needed for Tibet, like cloth. Then after the Chinese arrived they did a lot of money exchanges and it became much easier, or should I say, convenient. In Lhasa, they accepted the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> and issued a check to be collected at their Calcutta Bank. So this was very helpful for the medium and smaller traders, right?   

**Q:**  So that they didn't have to carry money?   

**A:**  Yes, dayans was given and converted to rupees. In Kalimpong, the one who worked with checks was Mr. Wang, the one who stayed at the Himalayan Hotel. In Kalimpong, one could cash up to 20,000 rupees from the Jetmul Bank. Beyond that amount, one had to go to the Calcutta China Bank. In order to do that, Mr. Wang needed to certify the check cashier's identity. And so I used to go. Mr. Wang seemed to know me and he used to tell the check bearer to bring me so that I could guarantee the person's identity. Later, word got around, and so I went quite a few times. So in this way, should I say that there was more money or things were more convenient? Anyway, trading became brisk. Later, the Chinese constructed a lot of houses around <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, Nortölinga and Lhasa, and then steel for construction and corrugated sheets for roofs were ordered in large quantities. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> also got a lot and trade increased.   

**Q:**  How much did it increase? What I'm trying to get at is that traders and people in general, when they are trading and making money, they tend to forget about politics, right? Now, suppose one was opposing the Chinese. Can we separate as to who would have been more against the Chinese; the monks and monasteries, the traders, or the common people?   

**A:**  I didn't look into that. Just that brisk trade was going on. Then, a bit later, the procuring of vehicles began. A lot of jeeps were taken in.   

**Q:**  You mean private jeeps?   

**A:**  Yes, private. In Nathula, high transportation fees were paid. Then they were assembled in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and driven.   

**Q:**  Regarding the bank, the way <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> was paid and a check was received—now, there had to have been a bank in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it is said that there was one. I wonder—I have a feeling that before I left for India, they may have started one.   

**Q:**  You came in 1954, right?   

**A:**  The Chinese were staying in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a>, right? Below that, I have a feeling that they started this money exchange thing [bank].   

**Q:**  In Kalimpong, there must have been a lot of Tibetans?   

**A:**  Yes, quite a number.   

**Q:**  Just as today, did they all live mostly around the 10th Mile?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Now, if things had to be sent, did they go via Nathula or Dzelepla [Tib. རྫ་ལེབ་ལ]?   

**A:**  Large mule caravans went via Dzelep since they could come down all the way to Kalimpong. Areas like Top Khana, there were a lot of mules. So that's how some went. Others transported their items via truck to Gangtok. The Sikkim government had a transport office—don't you know about this?   

**Q:**  No, not at all.   

**A:**  There was the Sikkim State Transport Service. The one who worked in this was Yaba Tempo la [Tib. བརྟན་པོ་ལགས] who stayed in a house in Dhurpin.   

**Q:**  In Dhurpin?   

**A:**  Yes. The office was—do you know where Ongkar is?   

**Q:**  Yes, Mintri Transport.   

**A:**  Ongkar has a house facing the Mela ground, east, that also faces west. So on the ground floor, facing the Mela ground, there was the small office of Yaba Tempo la.   

**Q:**  Oh, then at present time, SNT is there. The Sikkim National Transport. The SNT office is located there.   

**A:**  Then that's the one. It's a small one, isn't it? At that time, Yaba Tempo la was there and all the Tibetans used to send through this office.   

**Q:**  So they took things there?   

**A:**  Then—you know the Gangtok trucks, which are not so large? It is said that the Sikkim government's largest income was this. They had a truck office and a workshop—it was large. At that time, Sikkim had a lot of income—wool was transported and so were many other items. If one could send their goods to Gangtok, the muleteers from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> were always there. If you waited one night, you could get your goods transported the next day. So mostly, it went from there.   

**Q:**  So why go that way?   

**A:**  Which way?   

**Q:**  Via Dzelep-la.   

**A:**  Muleteers, Tibetan muleteers. Those with 20-30 animals transported goods during the winter.   

**Q:**  Compared to trucks, were they cheaper? Traders usually go where things are easier or cheaper, right?   

**A:**  I don't know what their purpose was. They loaded their goods from Kalimpong to Dzelep, right? Another did not require their mules to go to Kalimpong and they remained in Gangtok. They hired trucks to Gangtok and then sent things. I don't know the reasons behind why they did that. From my perspective, the ones who went via Gangtok were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> muleteers. For example, they knew that their mules were in Nathula and that tomorrow, they were going to arrive in Gangtok, etcetera. They knew all of that. Our Tibetans, like the Khambas and households who had a lot of mules, said that during the winter, they were doing mönkor [Tib. མོན་སྐོར], which means transporting back and forth from Kalimpong via Dzelepla or Nathula to Yadong.   

**Q:**  The mule transport remained until 1959, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. For example, I had to send diesel fuel for the government trucks, like 40-80 loads [probably barrels]. I bought from Onkar.   

**Q:**  You bought from Onkar below [the petrol pump is at the motor station]?   

**A:**  I would just fill them up and ask them to fill up as many drums as I needed and they would fill them. Then, I'd send them to Tsarong Ludrup [Tib. ཚ་རོང་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ] Labrang. He was said to have been the chandzö. He was an elderly monk who wore a broad hat. He was my regular transporter. They must have had about 40-50 mules. As soon as they arrived, Chandzö la went to Ongkar to inquire about me. Ongkar would then call me up saying that the old man had come and what did I want him to say. So I told him to fill so much fuel and that I was coming over. Then I went. I always sent things through them. Now, if I sent things through him—during this time, I sent things under the government permit. Sometimes I sent petrol because the various aristocrats had permits issued by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilingka</a> and they requested it through me. Then there was also government petrol. The Sikkim political officers issued petrol permits for the Dalai Lama's cars. One had to be careful at this time because the price of petrol was high and it was said that they transported petrol illegally [Tib. རྒྱག་སྐོར་རྒྱག] by giving money to the police. There were a lot of stories about being caught by the police on the Nathula Pass and all. So if our loads were caught, since they were government loads, then that was no good, right? So if I gave it -to the Chandzöla, there was no such danger. Whatever you sent him, he would transport it with no problems. He was a nice man, this chandzö.   

**Q:**  So the main trade was in wool, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So this came via both Nathula and Dzelepla?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If they were to bring it down to Kalimpong, then where did they deliver it? To the Marwaris?   

**A:**  Each one had their connections and there were godowns where the wool was kept. Now, only the Marwaris had godowns, right? Before the deal was even made, and if they knew each other, it seems that they kept the goods in the godowns. Later, if the negotiation fell through, the Marwaris must collect some storage charge.   

**Q:**  So the Marwaris sort of bought the wool at wholesale?   

**A:**  Yes, if they agreed on the price. There was also a difference in weighing methods. There was drö and kandra.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  Kandra is the India system of weighing with a hook. It is more expensive if it is weighed in this way. It's said there is a small and a large one. Then there is drö, which is a Phari word for the Tibetan Nyaga weighing scale. If it is weighed in drö—I wonder if the price is better. Anyway, there is a difference. I think in the drö system there is leeway for cheating. It is said that the Marwaris made this Phari drö and they kept it. So when one was trading, one had to agree from the beginning on the prices according to which system was used.   

**Q:**  Then where would they sell?   

**A:**  Then they would make it into a bale or gandri, at the godown. Even in Canada they make fodder hay into nice square pieces—so like that. That was the reason why they had to make large godowns at Kalimpong. They took the wool out and separated the "dirt" [Tib. ཉིག] and made it into bales and sent it to America.   

**Q:**  To Calcutta?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  We did talk about that last time. Now, from the political point of view, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, right? What was their main work? Was it to contact the outside? In 1954, Kungö Khenjung came to Kalimpong, right?   

**A:**  Please stop the tape. [See Anonymous Interview]. In Kalimpong, we were able to start the Dalai Lama's birthday ceremony. The reason being that in Tibet, in the Dalai Lama's room in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, the Trungla Yasö [Tib. འཁྲུང་ལྷ་དབྱར་གསོལ], the summer worshipping for the Birth Deity, which was actually the birthday ceremony—and for one or two days near the Lhasa Kyichu River, there was a village called Trungla [Tib. འཁྲུང་ལྷ] with a temple and a caretaker from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Tratsang. Here the birth ceremony took place and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> [family] invited guests. So there was such a ceremony in existence. Therefore, in Kalimpong, we celebrated the Dalai Lama's birthday and burnt incense on the Durpin hill and had a party afterwards. From that time on, until the present, that's how the Dalai Lama's birthday came into being. I think it was in 1962 or '63. I can't be sure that July 6th was chosen as the Dalai Lama's birthday. In Tibetan, it was the 5th day of the 5th month, but the Western month fluctuates because of our calendar. So we said that we had varying dates and finalized one specific date. This was not just arbitrarily decided. I don't know how he got it, but Jawdang Ta lama was working at the Religious Office. The Dalai Lama was born in the Wood-Boar Year. He found an old calendar of that year. When he looked at what date the 5th month, 5th day corresponded with, it was July 6th. So then a proclamation was issued. But it started in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  What other work was there? To raise the Tibet issue to the outside? Were they meeting or how were they doing things?   

**A:**  Generally, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> met [the three principals], and mainly, in Kalimpong, there was not much to do except to make relations with the Indian government and to try something in foreign countries. There was not much to do in Kalimpong—in that small place.   

**Q:**  Not just to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> meetings, but you must have gone to some other meetings.   

**A:**  Yes, I did. But these were just common meetings, as I told you yesterday—if there was a flood in Gyantse, then relief contributions from the Kalimpong side would have been made.   

**Q:**  Yesterday, you mentioned the Long Life Offering, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> [Tib. བརྟན་བཞུགས་ཞབས་བརྟན], in Lhasa.   

**A:**  Yes. In that case, then we met. What we did was call the people's representatives and say that we needed to do this. And whether contributions needed to be made or—they would do whatever you asked. Regarding the contributions for the golden throne, we sent contributions. Also, depending on what rituals were necessitated for the Dalai Lama's life, we spent money on rituals at various pilgrimage sites in India. Regarding the Gyantse flood, we collected contributions, right? At that time, everybody gathered in Kalimpong. At that time, we workers were there. Then, Sherpa Tsenam la [Tib. ཚེ་རྣམ་ལགས], he was of the Tibetan race, right? Then Dawa [Tib. ཟླ་བ] Babu and the clerk, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> Trunyi Pasang Tempa la [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང་དྲུང་ཡིག་པ་སངས་བསྟན་པ་ལགས]—knowledgeable people of the area. We divided into groups for the purpose of collecting contributions. Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, Sherpa Tsenam, Dawa Babu and myself were to collect contributions from Darjeeling. We went there and as we began to contact the people of Darjeeling, immediately, the Tibetans—like people of Darjeeling like Tenzin [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན] Sherpa and various elderly foreigners, many assembled and—remember the Park?   

**Q:**  Park Hotel?   

**A:**  Yes. What's it called right opposite to that?   

**Q:**  Opposite to Park? Glenery's? Pliva? [Pliva is the old name for Glenery's.]   

**A:**  Yes [for Pliva]. They made preparations for us there. They gave us tea and we explained the circumstances. They said, "Of course, we will do what we can. Collecting contributions for Tibet is a once in a lifetime opportunity." They said that there was no need for us to stay around, so we could return to Kalimpong. They said that they would take responsibility for Darjeeling and its adjoining area of Siliguri. Thus, the prominent people in the group took responsibility. They also gave us an excellent meal. So we return and later, they collected a handsome amount. In Kalimpong, one had to collect from the Marwaris, right? Sure there were Tibetans, people like Pasang Tempa and all were well acquainted with the Marwaris. It's said they told the Marwaris, "Here! Write one thousand down! Until today, when did we ever come around? This is a one-time event. Write more, write more!" They made a good collection. We bought food items and blankets that we sent to Phari. In Phari, the Chinese stopped the shipment, saying we could do it ourselves and didn't need help from the outside.   

**Q:**  So they did not allow it?   

**A:**  No, and it is said that items were left at the Customs Office, Shosher Leygung [Tib. ཤོ་བཤེར་ལས་ཁུངས], warehouse.   

**Q:**  When you had some meetings, did you meet in some houses [kudrak's houses]?   

**A:**  Yes. We also met at Khenjung's house. Once—where is it now? Behind Durpin, there is someone from Ga called Gatru [Tib. སྒ་ཕྲུག]. We also met at his house.   

**Q:**  What is the background of Kungö Khenjung? His monastery and shagtsang.   

**A:**  His background is this. There was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> who went to look for the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. His name was Khyenrab Tenzin [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ་བསྟན་འཛིན]. He was the Nagchu Khembo [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་མཁན་པོ]. Khenjung is his brother and assisted his brother going to Xining. Later, his brother, the Nagchu Khembo, upon their return after a successful search, was appointed as the Simpön Khembo. And later, he was appointed as the Jigyab Khembo. He was a nice man.   

**Q:**  What was his character like?   

**A:**  Kind of strange or unusual [Tib. ཁྱད་མཚར་པོ]. If one looks from the point of view of patriotism to the government, then he was very devoted and loyal to the government [Tib. གཞུང་བསམ་རྣམ་དག].   

**Q:**  What shall I say—you know how some people are jovial and some are serious or stoic [Tib. གདོང་ནག་པོ]?   

**A:**  No, he was not stoic. He was one who hated the Chinese and was very devoted to the government.   

**Q:**  Later, three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> came. Thubden Nyinji la [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད་ལགས], Champa Wangdü la [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས་ལགས], and Champa Tsündrü la [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ལགས], right? When did they come and why did they come?   

**A:**  They came to Kalimpong with the hope of accomplishing something for Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did they discuss and come on their own, or did the government send them or at Kalimpong--   

**Q:**  Now, at Shangdab, a hydroelectric station was started. Why and how was it started?   

**A:**  In Tibet, whatever electricity there was, was the Dogde, and there were the machines in Trapchi. The Dogde was getting old and no one was renovating it, and it was deteriorating. It was not sufficient. It seems like the government was thinking along the lines of spending money and trying to make some income in Lhasa from setting up the electricity. Finally, from Calcutta—I thought I already told you this!   

**Q:**  Yes. Yes, but just in case something extra comes out of it. I thought this was important since it was something modern.   

**A:**  If you ask Kungö Rimshi, something might come of it.   

**Q:**  Yes, I will ask my father, but sometimes what you know he may not remember. Yesterday, you did relay it well, but I thought I would just ask once again.   

**A:**  Then Reed Sab (Sahib) came to Lhasa. He was paid a daily wage, which was considered high by Tibetan standards. He was hired and he came to Lhasa. He also toured the small electricity unit at Dogde. Lheding Sey <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ཞབས] A respectful term of address usually for monks, but also to show respect to a layman.">Kusho</a> [Tib. ལྷ་ལྡིང་སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས], the one who is said to have died in Bhutan, he and I went for his tour. People had to go from our office, right? He also looked at the electricity components at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>. He also toured various places in Lhasa and finally, he made an assessment of the equipment needed, the expenses and what electricity output could be expected. If this electricity could be established, then there would be electricity and income generated. So, based on his assessment, parts were ordered from India. Shangdab was the spot chosen for the project. Canals were dug and houses made, and the people appointed to be in charge were Kungö Rimshi [Tsarong] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Thubden Tsering la [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་རིང་ལགས]. The canals were very good. One of the main people advising was Aufschnaiter. He was also paid by Trapchi Leygung.   

**Q:**  The canals were dug, and did the water descend down an incline and was the force of the water used to produce electricity?   

**A:**  It was hydroelectric, right? At that stage, there was no electricity. Only canals were dug and houses built. What you are thinking of was that the water moved at an incline and then turned. What I heard was that was not the case. It was supposed to be sort of just pressing down. That's what I heard, but at that stage, houses were built and water had not come to the canals.   

**Q:**  So you're saying that the water sort of flowed slowly?   

**A:**  A large canal was built and it was of excellent quality. Grass was growing on the sides and even if one wanted to go for a walk, one could do so on both sides. It was of excellent quality.   

**Q:**  How wide was it? In terms of feet?   

**A:**  I can't tell you how many feet it was, but if one wanted to jump across, one could not.   

**Q:**  How much work was done? The project was started before 1950, and towards the end, it could not be completed— what happened?   

**A:**  When we used to go there at times, at the office, we sort of went on a tour. We used to go. At that time, as I mentioned, the canals were very good and so was the house. Other than that, there was no water in the canals and no machinery in the canals. It hadn't really started. Later, when it fell apart, I wonder how much was done. I doubt there was much.   

**Q:**  A lot of parts were sent, right?   

**A:**  Yes. From Calcutta. Whatever was sent came from the General Electric Company—they sent whatever was possible. Parts that could not be sent were stored in Deorali, below Gangtok town, in a warehouse that we had made with corrugated sheets.   

**Q:**  Yes, there was some talk like that. I think it was about three or four years ago, Brother Kyidu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྦུག་ཇོ་ལགས] was saying something to the effect that the generators were still there and are still to be sold or something like that. That was just three to four years ago.   

**A:**  Oh! It must have been. Yes, huge items. You know the tea stalls in Deorali? Towards the cliff-side, there were many. They were left over there since they could not be transported. They were too heavy. The easily transported items were sent.   

**Q:**  Yes, it seems that some work was left over. Kyidu Thöndrub la [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་ལགས] was working on it or something. I don't know. Anyway, there was some talk about it around four years ago.   

**A:**  Now what can be done about it? Who can one give it to? If something was left over, maybe related parts were not.   

**Q:**  Probably, he might want to sell it to some Indians somewhere.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were in Kalimpong, did you hear anything about connections with the US? Any talk in the bazaar?   

**A:**  No, I don't recall any.   

**Q:**  Those who were in Kalimpong, did they really believe that they were able to get independence, or was it just to be against the Chinese and make things uncomfortable? At this time, what was your thinking? You were there in Kalimpong and there was an organization, and whether there were relations with foreigners or India—something was being done from the outside.   

**A:**  Yes, there was such hope. Now, even if all of us Tibetans were to get together, there was no hope, right? But when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> were working from the outside, I recall thinking that some war assistance would come from the outside. At that time, we did not think about how much some country could get involved in another or was permitted to do so. And even if one country did get involved, then what advantages were they going to look for practical politics? I remember thinking that military assistance would come.   

**Q:**  Now, in Kalimpong, the Chinese, whether they were communists or Guomindang, did they have an office, or spies, or people concerned with Tibet?   

**A:**  Later, there was. There was a Guomindang Chinese, a lame person [leg]. I think there were maybe one or two Tibetans. They were, what should I say, spies. Otherwise, there was nothing else to do. The communists had people working in the Trade Mission. Around 1962, they had left.   

**Q:**  Which Chinese was working in the Trade Mission?   

**A:**  I forget his name, but he had a very nice character. He was the head. There were about six or seven of them. So unless they spied, there was nothing else to do.   

**Q:**  Did they sort of try to contact and say, come for dinner, and things like that?   

**A:**  Yes, they invited us for meals, but we would not go.   

**Q:**  So they did try to establish relations?   

**A:**  You know October 10th [Ch. shi yi]? During occasions like that, I remember they asked us once or twice. And so since we did not go, they did not bother us. As far as I see it, in this small town, in Kalimpong, there was nothing to do except to listen to the talks going around.   

**Q:**  I was thinking that they may have been asking the Tibetans wwho settled there to return and were saying that the children who were going to school there, that they should not go to school there but should return.   

**A:**  It seems that they were saying this thing earlier. At that time, the situation in Lhasa was congenial [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ་མོ] between the Chinese and the Tibetans. It may have been around that time. There were children only of wealthier households, right? So it seems that that did take place.   

**Q:**  Kungö, you went down to China in 1952, right? What was the reason? Were they insisting that you all had to go?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. The Chinese were making a lot of claims about progress and development in China, right? So they were saying that it would be good to see these things, and it seems that the Chinese asked the Tibetan government quite a few times. It seems that the government did not give any answer immediately. Later, and they must have asked quite frequently, it was sort of decided that a tour group would be sent. So we left in August 1952.   

**Q:**  Where did you go?   

**A:**  All over in China. I don't think there was any place we did not go.   

**Q:**  So you went from Lhasa to Nagchu, right?   

**A:**  Yes, from Lhasa to Nagchu, to Riwoche [Tib. རི་བོ་ཆེ], to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  So you went up to Chamdo on horseback, right?   

**A:**  Yes, up four days past Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Riwoche?   

**A:**  No, no. From Riwoche to Chamdo and up to Derge, we went on horseback. It took us 37 or 34 days. Then there was a motorable road and we went in vehicles. The horses returned. It was around the Derge border. I think it was called Kyoshung. Or was it Katok [Tib. ཀ་ཐོག]?   

**Q:**  So when you went to these various places in China, how were arrangements made for your stay? Were there people to receive you?   

**A:**  For instance, when one left Chamdo, on that side of the hill there were road builders. It was said that there were about 20,000 people. Before we got there, there were red flags posted everywhere. Then they must have telephoned or something, but immediately, from the military, there were people wearing silk and beating drums. So we were served lunch in a tent. We did not stay the night. After that, wherever the night-stop occurred, we made our own arrangements and stayed with our Tibetan misers.   

**Q:**  Then from some place, did you go all the way to Beijing in vehicles?   

**A:**  No. We went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> and up to Chengdu in vehicles. We stayed in Chengdu for a day or two and then we flew to Xi'an. From there we took the train to Beijing.   

**Q:**  All together, how long did you stay?   

**A:**  Not quite a year.   

**Q:**  Almost a year! Wow! And then you went all over the place.   

**A:**  We also went to Mongolia.   

**Q:**  Now, you were being taken all over the place, right? Suppose we were to follow a day's routine, how did it begin?   

**A:**  Oh, the routine was very difficult.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  It was so bothersome! For example, since their work was all done under force [Tib. བཙན་དབང] [read under orders], they were well organized. For example, if we got to stay in a place like Dharamsala, immediately, at the Kashag, they had everything arranged in the hall. The water for hand washing, and tea and snacks were provided. By this time, the places to stay were decided and they had stuck the names on the doors of the rooms. Then each one was taken to one's room.   

**Q:**  Each person had their own room?   

**A:**  Yes, most often. Sometimes there were two in a room; it depended on the facilities available at each place. Now, suppose one arrives tonight. Tomorrow morning, right after breakfast, the program of the day is announced—that we are going to go to such and such places. The cars are outside ready to go, so then we go here and there and then return.   

**Q:**  Return for lunch?   

**A:**  Yes. We have lunch and as we are about to finish, the program for the afternoon is decided.   

**Q:**  You had no rest after lunch?   

**A:**  Maybe a little. But it was exhausting. Then after it's over, we return for the night. So the day's work is done, right? But there is a show to attend. While we are having dinner, whether it is a movie or an opera, they give us tickets.   

**Q:**  What were the movies and operas about?   

**A:**  Mainly they were about how the Guomindang soldiers made the people suffer and how the people welcomed the Communists. The usual nice ones. Now, the operas were interesting.   

**Q:**  So the movies and everything were at night, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Now, we thought that after dinner we would just like to sit and relax, right? No, right after dinner they gave us tickets and said that we had to go some place.   

**Q:**  Now, suppose you just wanted to go out for a stroll or go shopping, would they take you to do that too?   

**A:**  If we went shopping—the moment we went out the door, the Chinese cadres immediately asked, "Where are you going? Where are you going?" So we said we were going. Some of us, they could not manage, and we used to just go even if we did not know our way. So they would immediately come with us.   

**Q:**  So you went shopping?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Now, suppose you were to buy something. What would you have bought at that time?   

**A:**  We didn't have that much money, anyway. They were just ordinary things, like some snacks to eat and doing some "strange things." It is said that they did not have expensive things, except the government, and we did not have the money either. If one bought a sweater—the price was indicated and there were so many zeros. The reason being that 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> was equal to 10,000 in paper currency. So if the item cost 12 dayan, then how much was it?   

**Q:**  120,000.   

**A:**  So, therefore.   

**Q:**  Now, for those who went there, did the Chinese give you something—some presents of sorts?   

**A:**  No. They paid all of the expenses, but there wasn't anything like that. Before we went to Mongolia, they gave us each a fur dress [Tib. པགས་ཚག], and I think a pair of boots each. When we went to see Inner Mongolia, they gave us each felt boots since it was so cold.   

**Q:**  During this time, did you have any talks among yourselves? That what they were doing was not good or that were you suspicious of each other?   

**A:**  It was as if we almost had no time for that. To say that it was no good was something that we were sort of unable to do because what they were showing us were all the good things, right? What they were doing in front of us, they were doing with utmost care. So from that point of view, such talks sort of could not arise. Generally, by night time, we would all be tired out.   

**Q:**  Therefore, from the political point of view, some talk [question not finished]   

**A:**  Such talks like that and the expression of our opinions was something that almost did not take place.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, did one have suspicions of others?   

**A:**  Not that—we [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  You could not say, right?   

**A:**  We could not say it comfortably. That was known by all of us, wasn't it? But to say that something was bad—we never saw it, right? They took us to only the good places. For example, if one takes some one to Calcutta and shows them all of the good places, then one never sees the bad in the nooks and crannies.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there any songs in Lhasa about going down to China and things like that?   

**A:**  No, there were none. Now, as I mentioned earlier, after the tour, there was a report about how good things were, right? And we did see things as being good. Mainly, it was as I have mentioned to you, whatever they said, we basically had to write. So when the Chinese in Lhasa talked about this, there must have been people who did and did not accept. But when we came up to Lhasa, I did not hear anything unfavorable—that we said such and such thing.   

**Q:**  Maybe you might have some funny stories to tell. Who was it? Somebody had taken a leather box or something, but when they reached China, it became rotten. Something like that. I wonder which tour group it was, but I don't recall who said that. So did anything unusual occur? Funny things?   

**A:**  Something funny—when we went down, it was a time when it was raining a lot. I don't recall anything funny. [Many years ago, I sort of remember—maybe it was my father who said it—however, someone, instead of peeing in the urinals, shat in it. So it seems that everyone was trying to guess who the culprit might have been. Since the urinals were rather high off the ground, it seems that they concluded that it must have been someone rather tall in stature].   

**Q:**  Kungö, that's about it.   

