# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0069.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. zhing gsar blo bzang dge legs]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. zhing gsar blo bzang dge legs]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 61  
**Date of Birth:** 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. zhing gsar blo bzang dge legs] was a monk official and a staff member of Trapchi. In this interview, he continues from Part 1. to discuss in great detail about Kujar Künphel la. He talks about how, as a child, Kujar came to Norbulinga at the request of the 13th Dalai Lama and became the favorite of the Dalai Lama, and the various tasks he did there, including writing scriptures, working in the Trapchi Electric Mechanical Unit, and building the Drongdrag Regiment. He discusses the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, the arrest of Kujar and other officials and their banishment. He then discusses the arrest and punishment of Lungshar, and Kujar's demotion and permission to return. Finally, he talks about how Kapshöba exposed Lungshar and was later demoted multiple times before finally being appointed an official of the third rank.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0069_02/H_0069_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  The Dalai Lama's personal attendant, Kujar Thubden Künphel la, was born in the Nyemo Shuyaga [Tib. snye mo gzhu ya gag] as a miser of the aristocratic family (Tib. gerpa) Nyemo Treshongpa [Tib. bkras gshongs pa]. When he was a child, the 13th Dalai Lama recruited students from the Nyemo and E areas for the purpose of learning to write the initial sketches on paper before sketching onto the wood printing block [Tib. par rtsa] for the Kangyur [Tib. bka' 'gyur] text project. That's how he came to Norbulinga. After that, his main work was to learn to write the Tibetan Printing Script [Tib. dbu can] and the Intermediate Handwriting Script [Tib. dbu med], and he also how to take care of flowers. He also worked as the assistant [Tib. lag g.yog] to all the craftsmen, like the painters and tailors. He told me that there wasn't any type of craftsmen for which he hadn't worked as the assistant. He was probably clever with work when he was young. Gradually, he became the favorite [Tib. spyan bsal] of the Dalai Lama and he was called Dechen Chödrön [Tib. bde chen chos sgron]. Later, he took monk's vow and was named Thubden Künphel. He also worked on the construction of the eastern part [Tib. shar rgyud] of the Potala and was in charge of building the main palace of the Jensel Phodrang [Tib. spyan bsal pho brang] called Dekyi Ngotshar Palkyi [Tib. bde skyid ngo mtshar dpal skyid]. He worked according to the wishes of the Dalai Lama. Usually, he would also go early in the morning with a stable boy as his servant to places like Dogde [Tib. dog bde] and Lhadong Shenka [Tib. lha gdong shan kha] where the rocks were being split. When the rocks were transported in carts drawn by horses or mules, he would come back with the carts. He was very capable with work. Before that, the Tibetan government had the Golden Coin Work Unit called Nortö Sertram Leygung [Tib. nor stod gser tram las khungs] and the Dekyi Trülso [Tib. bde skyid 'phrul bzo] Mechanical Workshop located near the Yamön and the mint in Dogde [Tib. dog bde dngul par]. Later, all of these three work units were merged together and they set up the Trapchi Electrical Mechanical Work Unit [Tib. grwa bzhi glog 'phrul khang]. He built this work unit on an empty plain. After the late Changöba [Tib. bya dngos pa] came back (fronm school) in England, he worked on the electricity, and all the work for making tools and printing currency was done with those machines. At that time, a rifle was also made imitating the 303 English Carbine. There were some other different kinds of guns made. There was a big factory where paper currency and coins were printed. After the Prime Minister Shatra [Tib. blon chen bshad sgra] signed the [Simla] agreement with the British, the British government gave 5,000 English Carbines with long barrels [Tib. dbyin ji kha ring] as a gift. At that time, in the Magjigang [Tib. dmag spyi khang], the military headquarters, there were different guns, like the Tibetan guns made in Tibet and the guns made in Japan, Russia and Germany. This was because at that time in Tibet, people were allowed to keep guns without having licenses. I found in the books of the Trapchi Work Unit that all of the weapons were kept in the military headquarters in Shöl and the officials in charge were appointed one after another. At that time, Drumpa Dzasa [Tib. bhrum pa dza sag] was appointed as the person in charge of the headquarters, but he didn't work well. After that, Lungshar was appointed, but he also didn't work well. Finally, Thubden Künphel was appointed as the person in charge of that, and he was very capable and speedy [Tib. lcag po] regarding doing his work. Tsarong was also there and there was a tsipön, a trunyichemmo, and many staff members. When I looked at the titles of those books, it seemed that Thubden Künphel was really precious [Tib. rtsa ba chen po] and served the government with accomplishments. At that time, he was very powerful and he was chauffeured in a car when he went back and forth to Trapchi. In the Water-Bird Year, the 13th Dalai Lama died on the 30th of the 10th Tibetan month. Until the 26th of the 11th month, nobody said anything bad to Künphel la. He also attended the meeting where they chose the place for building the golden stupa for keeping the remains of the 13th Dalai Lama that was called Serdong Gelek Dönjö [Tib. gser sdong dge legs 'dod 'jo]. In the meantime, when they held the meetings regarding how the government should exercise their political power, some of the pro-Kujar officials said that Künphel la should assist Prime Minister Langdün [Tib. glang mdun]. Some others said that it would be better to have a lama as a regent. At this time, Kujar and Lungshar were not getting along well and after Kujar had been powerful for many years, there were many people who either liked or disliked Kujar. These people ganged up together and they called Kujar to the meeting on the 26th of the 11th month. They told Kujar, "The Dalai Lama passed away all of a sudden and the people of Tibet were left in the dark. Why didn't you people serving the Dalai Lama report the illness he got before that? This is a severe violation against the life of the Dalai Lama." This was their accusation. Kujar said, "All of them knew it before that. Probably, on the last day when the Dalai Lama passed away, the Kashag and all of them came to the Dalai Lama, and the ex-Ganden Tripa, Champa Chödrag [Tib. dga' ldan khri zur], was also there. At that time, all of them told the Dalai Lama, 'Please recover from your illness. Please give instructions on what we should do. We will repent what we have done in the past and correct ourselves in the future [Tib. sngar 'gyod phis 'doms].' "At that time, the Dalai Lama told them, 'Today, it is useless for you to come in. The ex-Ganden Tripa is also old in age. So please do not come in. As for the instructions, I already distributed them earlier in written form. You can act according to them. I don't have any new instructions.'" I think this is what Kujar told me. The instructions were probably in his last will issued in the Water-Monkey Year [Tib. chu spre zhal gtam], in which he mentioned how the communist system would become popular and such content. Anyway, on that night, he passed away. starthere At that time, Kujar was living in the outer stable [Tib. chibs ra mdo] where the senior tutor of the Dalai Lama used to live after he moved from Jensel Phodrang. On the next day, Kujar was also called to the meeting held in gag. Tseja Changkyim [Tib. chang khyim] and the rupön of the Gusung Regiment of the Dalai Lama—Chapa Sey [Tib. cha pa sras], who was related to Lungshar—brought Kujar to the meeting. They brought him from the stable to the gag [Tib. 'gag or rtse 'gag], and there were also soldiers stationed there. When Kujar was told that they were going to arrest him, he said, "If you want to check my body, I have a hand gun." And he handed over his gun. Then they took the gun away, but at the meeting Chapa Sey said, "Kujar pointed the gun at me and tried to shoot me [Tib. me mda' tshad tshad byed kyi 'dug]." Then Kujar said, "This is not true. I handed over the gun to you. You can ask the Tseja about this." The Tseja said, "This is not true. Kujar told us that he had the gun and he handed it over to us." At that time, Chapa Sey tried to accuse [him of] a new crime, but it didn't work out. Anyway, Kujar told me, "When I looked at the attitude of the people at the meeting who didn't like me, it seemed that it was confirmed that I would be imprisoned, and I didn't get any chance to talk." Then when he came out of the gag and came amidst the soldiers, and when he went towards the stage through the poplar trees where the opera would usually be performed and the soldiers would be given information, his escort soldiers became startled. But, Kujar told them, "You don't need to be startled. I am not going to run away." Then he prostrated three times towards the palace and prayed to the Deity Mahakala, Gombo [Tib. mgon po]. Then the soldiers took him walking all the way to the Potala Palace and he was imprisoned in Sharchenjog [Tib. shar chen lcog]. A lay official, a tsidrung, and some soldiers of the Gusung Regiment of the Dalai Lama were made to guard Kujar in the prison. Since those soldiers had been familiar with Kujar in Norbulinga, they respected him even though he was in the prison, and they didn't do any reckless things to him and didn't bother [Tib. bsun po] him. The lay official and the tsidrung didn't like the soldiers' attitudes. They wanted to treat Kujar worse than that, and so they withdrew the soldiers and sent some dobdo from the great monasteries [Tib. grwa sa] to guard Kujar. At that time, Kujar said that he was very much worried about how the dobdo would treat him. In the beginning, when they entered the prison, they showed a kind of impolite and defiant attitude [Tib. mjing pa sbom po], but when they saw Kujar, they showed a respectful attitude [Tib. zhum zhum], and they later served Kujar more than the soldiers did. Kujar was imprisoned on the 27th of the 11th month and they interrogated him. At the same time, they arrested the followers of Kujar, like his father and the servant called Rabgye [Tib. rab rgyas]. Among the attendants [Tib. zhabs phyi zhu mkhan] of the Dalai Lama, there were Tashi Thöndrub, Dechen Yingsal, Sonam Norbu and Kelsang Wangdü [Tib. skal bzang dbang 'dus], and many others were also arrested. All of them were interrogated and Tashi Thöndrub was imprisoned in Shöl. Anyway, on the 29th of the 12th month, just before the religious dance was performed, the verdict was issued. As for the crime, it was said that not reporting to the Kashag about the illness of the Dalai Lama it was a serious matter. Kujar was banished to Chamnag Monastery in Tselagang [Tib. rtse la sgang] Dzong. Tashi Thöndrub was banished to Dakpo Ganden Rabten [Tib. dwags po dga' ldan rab brtan]. The doctor, Champa La [Tib. byams pa lags], was banished to Gyatsha [Tib. rgya tsha] Dzong. Kujar's father was also banished. They arranged the times that Kujar was taken from the Potala and that his father was taken from Nangtsesha prison so that the two would meet near the Kyitöpa [Tib. skyid stod pa] House on the south side of the Tsuglagang. They also met in that place as it was arranged, but they were not allowed to talk to each other. At that time, many people cried saying that it was too bad that the person who served the Dalai Lama was treated very badly. So it seemed like this was the first work the government did after the death of the Dalai Lama. After that, Kujar had to stay in Chamnag Monastery and the other followers were handed over to some households, and some of them were punished. Then the New Year was celebrated, and on the 26-27th of the third month, the association [tsogpa, Tib. tshogs pa] of Lungshar called Kyichog Kundü, which means gathering all people in the direction of happiness, came out. Many government officials were involved in that association. It was said that they had an internal and an external pledge or regulations. It was said that one of the people who was opposed by Lungshar's association was Trimön Kalön and that, at that time, Trimön was kind of powerful. Anyway, Kapshöba knew about Lungshar's meetings and what kind of evil discussions [Tib. ngan gros] they made, and he reported it to Trimön. Because of that, Trimön ran away to Drepung for one or two days. After that, Lungshar was arrested in the Shöga (Regent's secretariat) and tried to run away. Anyway, Lungshar's followers were also arrested. It was said that when Lungshar was demoted and when they took off his boots, they discovered a letter in his boots in which a curse was written that said, "Press down Trimön Norbu Wangye [Tib. khri smon nor bu dbang rgyal non non]," and Lungshar ate another letter. This was what I heard. After that, they announced the verdict for Lungshar and they took out both of his eyeballs and sentenced him to life in prison. Among the followers of Lungshar, the following people were arrested and some of them were banished: Lhalu, who later became Kalön, Chapa Rupön, who tried to accuse Kujar, Janglojen Gung, the lay officials Gyankhar Nangpa, Menri, Drakton, and the tsidrung Gyütöpa la [Tib. rgyud stod pa lags] and Kongtrug la. They were probably arrested within 13-14 days and their verdicts were also issued, and it became as if the followers of Lungshar were basically destroyed, and among them, Lhalu got the chance to stay in Lhalu. The others were all banished and Janglojen Gung was banished to Kongpo Buchu Sergyi Lhagang. At that time, Kujar was also banished to Chamnag. So Janglojen wrote some letters to Kujar with pleasant wording like, "Since the Great Dalai Lama to whom all of us were grateful has passed away, there have been some internal and external changes with the situation of Tibet, and I am here in Buchu [Tib. rgyal ba bka' drin gyi bdag po dgongs pa gzhan don du gshegs rjes phi nang dus 'gyur mi zad pa'i nang tshan nga yang kong por lhags yod]." Like this they exchanged letters, and they also met each other frequently. After awhile, Kujar and Janglojen wrote some reports to the Kashag in Lhasa saying, "Please forgive us and give us permission to come back to Lhasa." But there were some kalön in the Kashag who disliked Kujar. Therefore, their report didn't have any result. Similarly, the people who were banished to other places also might have been submitting reports to the Kashag. At that time, Lhalu Sey [Tib. lha klu sras] was demoted from the government officials, but he was staying in Lhasa. He took some action and became a junior fourth rank official, senampa, again and had his hair in knots [Tib. spa lcog]. At that time, Lhalu said, "I am not Lungshar's son. I am the son of Shelkar Lingpa Depön." So the Kashag forgave him and granted him the position of lay official. After that, Kujar and Janglojen couldn't really tolerate being banished in Kongpo and so they decided to run away. Janglojen also knew some English from when he had gone to India to learn about the Lewis gun. Then the two of them discussed, saying that they had made the reports, but they didn't get permission to go back to Lhasa, even though other people got permission. So it was useless to stay there. So they asked the Dzong and the Chamnag Tratsang to go for a pilgrimage and they went to India via Tsöna. Janglojen Gung's writing was very good. So he wrote a report from the border, probably from around Tsöna, with the wording, "Lungshar's son, Lhalu Sey, was able to convince the Kashag and got the Senampa position through making Shelkar Depön his false father. But, the two of us didn't get permission to come back to our homeland. This is because the soul of Tibet is not even and not fair. Therefore, temporarily, we are going to run away [Tib. lung phrug lha sras sked byed shel mdar brdzus nas sras rnam pa'i go ming zhus bstsal rgyu rkyen gyi zhu sgo 'phigs/ phran gnyis rang yul la log 'thus rkyang pa zhus par don smin ma son pa bod yul sgang gshongs snyom min la brten/ gnas skabs byol thog to 'gro rgyu yin]." Actually, this report was just intended to make the Kashag angry. It was kind of useless. Then the two of them went to India through Assam. When they arrived in Kalimpong, there were some traders of Reting Labrang. Since Kujar was capable, he also worked for Reting Labrang on trade. After that, the two of them got together with Pandatsang Raga [Tib. spom mda' rab dga'] and met in the house called Reneva. They were talking about politics, though they were not that effective and they were not prepared to do anything. But some kind of rumors caused some turmoil [Tib. 'ur dkrog] and they received a notice from the Indian government saying that they were not allowed to stay in Bengal. Then they didn't have any options and Kujar went to Calcutta and made connections to go to China. After Kujar came back from China, he told me, "I also met Chiang Kaishek and Chiang said, 'I know about your matters and I will help you with whatever you need.'" Anyway, he stayed in China for one to two years. It was said that Kujar knew all about what happened during the Reting event and he told the Khendrönlosum (the khenjung, the tsendrön, and the interpreter, Lotsawa [Tib. lo tsa ba]), who were the representatives of the Tibetan government then. But I didn't know about this in detail. After that, Kujar wrote a report, again from China, and by that time, the kalön had also changed so he got permission to come back to Lhasa and he stayed in Yuthok House. Namgyal Tratsang [Tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshang] and many people then came to see him with arrival gifts [Tib. phebs gsos], and they also helped him because of his service to the Dalai Lama. At that time, Janglojen also got permission to come back. The Kashag probably took a letter from them guaranteeing that they would be law-abiding in the future. After that, Kujar also submitted a report and, at the time of the sitsab, he was given some money as a livelihood allowance [Tib. 'tsho rten] and given the front part of the house from the new palace in Lhasa, the Phodrang Sarpa. Regarding building the Phodrang Sarpa, Kujar also told me, "In the beginning, it seemed that I needed a house to stay in in Lhasa, but I didn't have the plans to build such a big house called a palace. Actually, I don't have the right to call the house a palace—and I was planning on building a simple house for me. But, the Dalai Lama, himself, told me several times that I should build a palace for him while I was building the house for me. But, after that, when I was unable to put it into action right away, when the Dalai Lama came to Lhasa, he stayed in the Tsuglagang. When he didn't stay in the Tsuglagang, he used to stay in the teaching grove of Tsomönling [Tib. tshe smon gling]. He told me, 'If you don't build a palace for me, I will have to ask for lodging in Tsomönling.' Therefore, the new palace was built." After one or two years, when the Dalai Lama took religious and political power, Kujar was given the title of Fourth Rank [Tib. rim bzhi] and he worked in the granary for the Tibetan government [Tib. 'bru khang las khungs]. I saw the note [Tib. 'go mchan] written by the Dalai Lama on the report submitted by Kujar. It was written very nicely. Kujar could get a livelihood allowance from the Trapchi office and he got the front part of the Phodrang Sarpa. He told me that he was just a child when he served the Dalai Lama in Norbulinga, and when he was banished, he was 27 years old. He was famous just from 18 to 27 years old. That's all that I remembered about Kujar. At that time, in the meeting, it was kind of widely spread that Jamön Depa and the Sera Mey Chandzö were among the people who hated Kujar and who were among the followers of Lungshar. But usually, only the abbots of the Sera and Drepung monasteries would attend the meeting. Otherwise, those people would not attend the meetings. Just after three to four months, Lungshar's tragedy happened, and Jamön Depa and the chandzö nicknamed "Western Horse," Tipija, hid in the monastery, and the monastery didn't hand them over to the government. One of the important events was that the Drongdrag Regiment was set up. This regiment was newly established on the west side of the Trapchi Electrical Mechanical Workshop. Later, this regiment belonged to the Trapchi Regiment called Gyajong Magar [Tib. rgya sbyong dmag sgar]. The sons of the well-to-do households, probably from the ages of 18 to 36, were recruited as the soldiers. This regiment was a very good one, and its uniforms and band were very good. The band teachers and drill teachers were called from the Gusung Regiment of the Dalai Lama. In just a few months, it became a complete regiment. Many government officials had also been soldiers in that regiment, like Ngabö Kalön and Netö [Tib. sne stod]. There were also many from the kudrak families. The regiment was very successful and the depön was Yuthok Kalön, who recently died. The ex-kalön, Taring [Tib. phreng ring], was confirmed to be the depön. Ngabö was appointed as the rupön and had already taken the position. Derge Sey Kelsang Wangdü [Tib. sde dhe sras skal bzang dbang 'dus], who was in Kham, was said to be the other rupön. It was said that Taring and Derge Sey were going to be appointed as depön as soon as the number of soldiers was enough to warrant having two new depön. Some people were thinking that Kujar set up the Drongdrag Regiment and depended and relied [Tib. blo bcol snying bcol] on it for the purpose of the regiment protecting him. But, according to my point of view, it seems that Kujar was not thinking in that way. Whatever he did was according to the thoughts of the Dalai Lama and the situation of the Tibetan government. He didn't seem like he was thinking for himself. However, on the outside, people suspected that if someone was to put their hands on Kujar, the Drongdrag would rise up. Anyway, the Drongdrag soldiers submitted a report seeking permission not to stay in the army. At that time, the Kashag was being held in Norbulinga and the soldiers went to the Kashag. It was the time of the chaos after the death of the Dalai Lama. At that time, the soldiers went down and didn't come back, and they did some things—like having no respect [for the government]. But the Kashag didn't do anything about that and gave them permission to leave immediately. When I recall this—it was not good for them to do that. but like this, the soldiers were all discharged. Actually, Kujar never thought of danger to himself and he never thought that the Drongdrag would protect him. He just did whatever the Dalai Lama told him to do daily. It didn't seem that he had a future plan for himself, but people probably had that kind of suspicion. All of the weapons of the government were stored in Trapchi, and I am not sure who the magji or Commander-in-Chief was then. They removed all the bolts of the rifles and took them down, and the situation was kind of chaotic. I was young and didn't have any idea what was going to happen in the long run. That's all of that I knew and I have told you without making any changes. I left one thing out to tell you. Kapshöba was the person who exposed Lungshar. In the beginning, Kapshöba was an official of the fourth rank, and he was also arrested at the same time in Sharchenjog in the Potala. And he was demoted from both his job and title of lay official [Tib. las zhabs gnas dbyung], and then he was released. I am not sure whether it was written in the verdict that Kapshöba would be allowed to take the position of lay official in the future. This happened in the 3-4th month of the Wood-Hound Year. In the 10th month, on the Death Anniversary of Tsongkhapa [Tib. lnga mchod], Kapshöba took the position of a seventh rank lay official. In the 3-4th month of the Wood-Hog Year, Kapshöba was specially appointed as an additional [Tib. las 'phar] tsipön. At that time, the people probably sang a song with the words, "Kapshö shot a golden slingshot from the roof of his house [Tib. ka shod thog kha'i sgang nas gser gyi 'ur rdo brgyabs song]." As I mentioned above, Kujar was arrested on the 27th of the 11th month in the Water-Bird Year. Lungshar was probably arrested on the 27th of the third month of the Wood Hound Year, and the verdict was issued in the beginning of the fourth month. I remember people saying, "The negative results of the 27th were repaid on the 27th [Tib. nyi shu bdun gyi lag g.yog nyi shu bdun la 'khor song]." After that, Kapshöba became a kalön and he was again demoted from the kalön, and he was also banished. At the time of the revolt in 1959, he was a third rank Teiji official [Tib. tha'i ji] I have one more thing that seems to have some substance. When Kujar was told that he was not allowed to stay in Bengal and he went to China, India was under the British, and the main person in charge was the Sikkim Political Officer [Tib. 'bras spyi] was Williamson. This is what Kujar told me, and he said, "Williamson did something malicious [Tib. bsam gnag] to me. After I got permission to come back to Tibet via India, I went to see him in Gangtok just to mock [Tib. bkyag bkyag byas] him. And I told him, 'Now, it has turned out very good, and I have obtained the chance to come back to my own homeland.'"   

