# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0069.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 61  
**Date of Birth:** 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས] was a monk official and a staff member at Trapchi. In this interview, he talks about the fall of Kujar Künphel la after the death of teh 13th Dalai Lama, and his own time as a student at the Trapchi School. He describes in detail the Drongdrag Regiment's request to be discharged, the appointment of a regent after the 13th Dalai Lama's death—including the nomination of Reting—and Trimön's fame afterwards. He discusses Janglojen and Kujar’s plan to flee to India, the Pandatsang incident, and how the former Panchen Lama came up with soldiers. Finally, he describes the incident where the Guomindang Chinese were sent back to China, and his assignment to Trapchi to guard the mint and the armory. He also talks about the nomination of various officials.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0069_01/H_0069_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  After the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, how long did it take before <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la got into trouble?   

**A:**  Twenty-eight days.   

**Q:**  How did it happen? Can you tell us the details in sequence? For example, on the 30th day of the tenth month, the Dalai Lama passed away. What happened on the 1st of the 11th month?   

**A:**  The government must have arranged to perform the last rites and the ritual ceremonies and things like that.   

**Q:**  Besides these, were there no troubles or problems?   

**A:**  No troubles at all.   

**Q:**  When did they hold the first meeting?   

**A:**  I don't remember the exact date, but before they held the meeting, Kujar was arrested. For 27 days after the Dalai Lama's death, he had not been arrested. So, until that time, he went about collecting gold to build the golden stupa in which the remains of the Dalai Lama would be enshrined. He was using the [Dalai Lama's] car. I also saw that he went to make plans for the golden stupa. Then after the 27th, they arrested him and his problems started.   

**Q:**  How did they start?   

**A:**  The people who did not like him, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> faction, started making accusations against him and they filed a complaint against him. It was done by the secretary of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>, the Yigtsang Nyerpa [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་གཉེར་པ], who later became Somphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད] Theiji.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Nyerpa? You mean the one who later became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. He was quite famous, and then there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ཞབས] A respectful term of address usually for monks, but also to show respect to a layman.">Kusho</a> Kyitö la [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས་སྐྱིད་སྟོད་ལགས]. Besides them, there was the Sera Jamön Depa [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན་སྡེ་པ]. With their combined efforts, they came to the decision to put Kujar under custody the next day when a meeting was gathered.   

**Q:**  Before Kujar's trouble started, I heard there was a meeting in which they said that the Prime Minister should have an able and educated lay official and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> as his assistants.   

**A:**  That was most likely before Kujar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la got into trouble, and I was told that the meeting was held at the work hostel of the Jensellingga [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་གླིང་ག]. One faction wanted Kujar to be elected as an assistant to the Prime Minister.   

**Q:**  Maybe this prompted his rivals to speed up his downfall.   

**A:**  This could have been one of the causes.   

**Q:**  There were two meetings held concerning Kujar: the first on the 26th and the second on the 27th. In the meeting, Kujar was told to leave behind any guns he was carrying, so he left his pistol behind. I think it was Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> who said this?   

**A:**  Yes, that's correct. Later Kungö himself told me .   

**Q:**  I see. You talked about it with him?   

**A:**  Kujar used to live at the residence of the senior tutor. Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a>, who later became the Ta Lama. Gusung Rupön Chapa were sent to summon Kujar for the meeting. As they [Chapa and Trekhang) escorted Kujar and before they reached the Tsega [Tib. རྩེ་འགག] (Secretariat office), Kujar said that there may be soldiers who might search his body so he he took out his gun and handed it over to his escorts. However, Chapa said later that Kujar had taken out his gun and threatened them, but he had snatched it away from him. Either way, he produced the gun before reaching the Tsega. Fortunately, Tseja Trekhang told them that Kujar had not threatened them, but had surrendered the gun voluntarily.   

**Q:**  I see. Was this on the 26th or the 27th?   

**A:**  It was on the 27th.   

**Q:**  In general, how was Kujar as a person?   

**A:**  Yes. I have seen a little bit of him [I have met him a few times]. At that time, I saw him as a very powerful and famous man. But now, when I analyze him, I conceive of him as a man who always carried out the Dalai Lama's instructions, and that he was a very straightforward and blunt man. He did not go about trying to please people. He was very young at that time.   

**Q:**  At that time, what were you doing?   

**A:**  I was a student and there were a lot of writings to be done for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office. So you see, I have seen on many occasions how the Trapchi functions.   

**Q:**  I see. You worked a lot in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office?   

**A:**  Yes, most of the students had to work for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office.   

**Q:**  The students were from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> school?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> school.   

**Q:**  How did the school come about?   

**A:**  You cannot really call it a school since it only had six students.   

**Q:**  Why was that so?   

**A:**  We were there to write letters and do other odd jobs.   

**Q:**  I see. It was like an apprentice school?   

**A:**  The main emphasis was to learn Tibetan. Then for those who could copy and write, there were a lot of copies to be made.   

**Q:**  Was this school mainly created for this purpose during the former Dalai Lama's time?   

**A:**  Yes, it was specially created for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office.   

**Q:**  I see, there were only six students?   

**A:**  There were only six of us.   

**Q:**  What was their aim? Maybe they were supposed to work in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> later?   

**A:**  I guess so.   

**Q:**  They taught only Tibetan and no other subjects?   

**A:**  Besides that, our main work was to copy the letters of the Trapchi.   

**Q:**  Don't you know Hindi and Nepali?   

**A:**  Those I learned myself.   

**Q:**  Didn't you learn them in school?   

**A:**  I studied at a Nepalese school.   

**Q:**  I thought maybe you had learned them at the same school.   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Kujar was the person in charge of Trapchi.   

**A:**  He was the peson in charge and together with him there was Tsarong and two Trungtsi (1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> and 1 Tsipön).   

**Q:**  Some say that Kujar had the post of a Ta Lama. Was this true?   

**A:**  I have heard about it, but I have only seen him wearing his own clothes/uniform dress. He didn't wear a Ta Lama's dress.   

**Q:**  It's possible that he didn't wear the Ta Lama's dress, but that his seat would have been that of a Ta Lama, right?   

**A:**  I have only heard that, but I have never seen him sitting on a Ta Lama's seat.   

**Q:**  When you had some official functions, where would Kujar sit?   

**A:**  I have no idea at all.   

**Q:**  He must have been attending these functions?   

**A:**  As I said, I have no idea.   

**Q:**  So then Kujar stayed like that for 20 some days after the Dalai Lama died?   

**A:**  For 27 days.   

**Q:**  Did he have any taboos-namdo [Tib. རྣམ་རྟོག] or anything?   

**A:**  I think not. He used to go for his work in the car. I saw him once coming in the car. So I don't think he had any taboos.   

**Q:**  He normally would have lived with the 13th Dalai Lama like a family member sharing their livelihood possessions, right? He didn't have his own family, right?   

**A:**  I don't think he had any special home as such.   

**Q:**  Just the same household?   

**A:**  Yes. He did not have anyone. He had a family which he was born into, that was all. No other ties.   

**Q:**  Didn't he have a wife? Was he a monk?   

**A:**  He was a monk and his real name was Thubden <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཀུན་འཕེལ].   

**Q:**  So, when he was summoned for the meeting, was he made to sit or stand? How was he treated?   

**A:**  I heard that he was made to stand throughout the meeting.   

**Q:**  Was it for both days? Some say that later, he was made to kneel?   

**A:**  Yes, I think on the second day he was made to kneel, and this was probably to fix him [teach him a lesson, lose face] [Tib. བཟོ་ལྟ་སྤྲད].   

**Q:**  Then when Kujar came out from the meeting near <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, he went to the Gömbo [Tib. མགོན་པོ] Temple.   

**A:**  After the meeting, Kujar was brought to the door. At the door, there were several military guards to take him. When he stepped out, suddenly, the guards became alarmed, but he said, "Don't worry. I won't run away." He faced <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, offered three prostrations, and prayed.   

**Q:**  Was it in front of the Gömbo?   

**A:**  No. The Gömbo’s statue was inside the Temple.   

**Q:**  From there they marched him up to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> and did not give him a chance to defend himself.   

**A:**  Then at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a>, they also continued interrogating him.   

**Q:**  Kujar was interrogated for a lot of things, but what was the main accusation against him?   

**A:**  The main accusation was that he did not inform the government about the Dalai Lama's deteriorating health. I also wondered what his crimes were supposed to be. In the interrogation, there were others like Tashi Thöndrub [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དོན་གྲུབ], Dechen Yingsel [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་དབྱིངས་གསལ], Sonam Norbu [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་ནོར་བུ], and Kelsang Wangdü [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དབང་འདུས]. They were all attendants of the late Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I see. So they questioned quite a few of them?   

**A:**  Yes, there were other people besides Kujar.   

**Q:**  It was just that he was so powerful and famous that his name overshadowed the others. How many people were taken into custody and questioned?   

**A:**  There were 5 attendants questioned. Then there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> oracle and his attendant, Chöndze. Doctor Champa [Tib. བྱམས་པ] was also there.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the medicine? Was it Chamjom Pawo [Tib. ཆམ་འཇོམས་དཔའ་བོ], 13 or 17?   

**A:**  It was Chamjom Pawo 18.   

**Q:**  Then they were kept at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> [the Potala] for some time?   

**A:**  They were kept at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> from the 27th of the 11th month to the 27th day of the next month. Exactly one month.   

**Q:**  At that time, were they given good food to eat?   

**A:**  The food was good enough. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsen la [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> were in charge of them.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was the trunyichemmo?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was the trunyichemmo. At that time, he was not a Ta Lama.   

**Q:**  No? Then who was the Ta Lama?   

**A:**  I think Dingar [Tib. ལྡིང་མཁར] was the Ta Lama. Besides him, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>, and Trekhang were the other trunyichemmo.   

**Q:**  Then Trekhang stopped attending the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>?   

**A:**  After that, he completely stopped attending the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  Then, when did Drönyerchemmo Kogpog die?   

**A:**  Kogpog died when the Kujar problem had just started. I think he died on the night they took Kujar up to Tse. I am not very sure about this.   

**Q:**  You mean he died the same evening they brought Kujar up there?   

**A:**  Yes, it is for sure that he died after the Kujar problem had started.   

**Q:**  Was Chemmo also interrogated?   

**A:**  No. I heard that he was among those who were behind the scenes and instigated the others, like making the thread of the kite sharp by applying powdered glass and glue [Tib. བརྣག་གཏོང].   

**Q:**  You mean Kujar?   

**A:**  Yes. However, I must admit that, about this matter, I don't know much. Anyway, he died at that time.   

**Q:**  Do people say that he was among those who instigated Kujar?   

**A:**  Yes. I have heard [things] like that.   

**Q:**  Didn't one abbot from Drepung also die around that time?   

**A:**  I have no idea about this.   

**Q:**  So, then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> [Tib. གྲོང་དྲག] Regiment which had been set up was disbanded after Kujar's fall. Wasn't that it?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment's soldiers were more or less forced to join as soldiers. They were not voluntary soldiers, so many of them did not want to remain soldiers. I don't know whether they were instigated by someone or not, but they went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to ask the Kashag to give permission [for them] to leave the regiment. I think they were sent back at once.   

**Q:**  Did these soldiers return back to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> or did they just roam around Lhasa instead?   

**A:**  They went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to protest together. Anyway, they were discharged.   

**Q:**  What was the main reason for getting the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> disbanded?   

**A:**  I do not have much [of an] idea about this, but according to my own views and talk, I heard that the regiment had been raised by Kujar himself. So, he must have had a purpose behind it.   

**Q:**  You mean as a force to back him up?   

**A:**  The main reason was that there were different soldiers. Some were not happy to remain as soldiers and some wanted to remain, since they were enlisted without many options. Anyway, when they asked permission to be released, they were let off.   

**Q:**  There were a lot of valuable things at Trapchi. If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> soldiers were discharged, who guarded them?   

**A:**  The security of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> had nothing to do with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment]. They had a squad of ten soldiers from the Gusung Regiment and a teacher to guard Trapchi.   

**Q:**  You mean they were already there as a regular security force?   

**A:**  Yes, they were the regular security force.   

**Q:**  Then tell me, why did they post 250 soldiers of the Gusung Regiment at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>?   

**A:**  This must have been done because they must have had certain suspicions since the armory was at Trapchi. Later, they took the bolts off the guns. [Laughter] This implies that they must have anticipated some attempt to attack Trapchi.   

**Q:**  Was it on the same day?   

**A:**  Yes, on the same day.   

**Q:**  They must have passed this decision at the meeting.   

**A:**  I guess so.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was some problem as to who should become the regent. Some said that the regency should be held by two people, a lay official and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, while others insisted that since Tibet was a religious country, she should have a monk regent so that people can venerate him. There was a lot of talk concerning this. Anyway, what I really wanted to know was, why did Sera Jamön Depa and the monk nicknamed "Western Horse," Tipija [Tib. ཏི་པི་ཅ], attend the assembly?   

**A:**  They were the representatives of Sera.   

**Q:**  Normally, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu gyepa [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ], only the abbots of Sera could attend the assembly. So why did they come to the assembly?   

**A:**  I don't know exactly how they came to the assembly. At that time, we were very young and didn't know much about the assembly. Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> also landed in trouble, and then Tipija and Jamön Depa, themselves, had to run and hide.   

**Q:**  I wonder if they had been permitted to attend the assembly by Lungshar. You never know, but then how would he have explained their presence to the assembly?   

**A:**  These talks could be false. At that time, they needed someone to garner support from the monasteries and act as their spokesman. Tipija and Jamön Depa carried out these functions. Were there talks that Tipija and Jamön came to attend the assembly at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and in the meeting they stood up and said something?   

**Q:**  Yes, there were talks. In the meeting, Jamsur (Jamön Depa?) or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> stood up and said that everyone knew who the late Dalai Lama trusted, implying that Kujar should be elected as the regent. Their rival faction asked who was responsible for not informing the Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> about the late Dalai Lama's failing health. So there was a lot of talk during the meeting. During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> problem, when the Drongdrag Regiment's soldiers dispersed, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s people said that since Sera was close by, they should call the monk guards [gyakag, Tib. rgya khag] to guard the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> mint and armory. Some say that it was Jamön Depa who suggested this.   

**A:**  I don't have any idea about this.   

**Q:**  During his interrogation, was Kujar given a fair trial with facilities to defend himself? Did they hold an investigation?   

**A:**  No, there were no such facilities. Everything was read out during the meeting.   

**Q:**  Didn't Kujar get a chance to defend himself against all the accusations? Was it only that they read out his crimes and he was not given a chance to defend himself?   

**A:**  No. During the meeting they passed their judgment and a decision was reached within 20 days, and there was no investigation team [Tib. ཞིབ་ས].   

**Q:**  During that time, for about two months, the regents and the Kashag ruled jointly. At that time, Gendün Chödar [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་དར] of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Lama. During the 13th Dalai Lama's reign, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was not that well-known. Then all of a sudden, Trimön became very powerful and well-known. Why was that?   

**A:**  Yes, I also heard [things] like that.   

**Q:**  It's not only that we heard about him, but you can see that during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, there was no news or any talk about him.   

**A:**  Yes. He was not popular or famous at all.   

**Q:**  During the 13th Dalai Lama's time, Langchungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ] was most well-known. After the 13th Dalai Lama's death, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> became very well-known all of a sudden. How did this happen?   

**A:**  I don't know. He was the senior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> Tripa.   

**Q:**  Was there a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama?   

**A:**  Even if there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama, there would have only been the distinction of monk and layman. Otherwise, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the Senior-most Kalön.   

**Q:**  Actually, during that time, did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama have to sit at the head?   

**A:**  Trekhang did not sit at the head.   

**Q:**  There are photographs which show that Trekhang did not sit at the head of the row and according to seniority.   

**A:**  Yes, that's true.   

**Q:**  However, later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was sitting at the head of the row. I don't know the reason. Normally, in the Kashag, they didn't make a distinction between a monk and lay official in their seating arrangements. This was an exceptional case because, normally, among the officials of the same rank, the monks were always seated first as a sign of deference.   

**A:**  Yes, it was something like that.   

**Q:**  There are photographs which show that Trekhang was sitting at the end of the row.   

**A:**  Yes, there are.   

**Q:**  However, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was sitting at the foremost of the row. Why was that?   

**A:**  Yes, I have also seen this.   

**Q:**  One possibility is that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> could have been the most senior between Surkhang and Ramba, the one who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> (Kalön) before.   

**A:**  Surkhang was most probably the Senior Shape.   

**Q:**  Then how come <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> sat in the front most row?   

**A:**  Yes, I have noticed that.   

**Q:**  When we were small kids, I remember seeing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> sitting in the first row. Are you sure Surkhang became a shape earlier than Ramba?   

**A:**  I am quite sure about this.   

**Q:**  Then Kujar was exiled and sent to Kongpo Chamnag [Tib. ཆབ་ནག]. Did you ever talk about it with him? Did he say that they had a difficult time?   

**A:**  Yes, we talked about that. He had been left under the care of a monastery.   

**Q:**  Was he at the Chamnag Labrang?   

**A:**  No, he was not at the Labrang. He had been handed over to the monastery. They treated him very well and gave him a room on the top floor. He could move around in Kongpo and leave for a few days at a time. The meals served to him were also excellent.   

**Q:**  According to the order passed by the government, they should not have granted this freedom of movement.   

**A:**  I guess they must have given such instructions.   

**Q:**  Was Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] also sent into exile somewhere near Kujar?   

**A:**  Shortly, after Kujar's downfall, maybe after two or three months, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> also got in trouble and Janglojen was exiled to Kongpo Buchu Sergyi Lhagang [Tib. བུ་ཆུ་གསེར་གྱི་ལྷ་ཁང]. Kujar was at Chamnag Monastery, so they contacted each other very frequently.   

**Q:**  In reality, Janglojen was from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> faction, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that's correct.   

**Q:**  Then why did they got along so well?   

**A:**  Janglojen was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> faction, but he was more involved in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] The name of the (political) party started by Lungshar after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. It translates roughly as, &quot;all joined together in happiness.&quot;">Kyichog Kundü</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] Party and it had no direct connection with Kujar.   

**Q:**  You mean although he was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s party, he had nothing to do with Kujar?   

**A:**  Kujar's episode was finished.   

**Q:**  I see. It was a different chapter which was finished and Janglojen had no involvement in the Kujar's episode.   

**A:**  Yes Sir. They later became friends. Much later when they came back to Lhasa, they were still friends.   

**Q:**  Kujar left Kongpo, but how long did he stay there?   

**A:**  He must have stayed in Kongpo for two to three years.   

**Q:**  At Chamnag, he had no work. He just took it easy and stayed in his quarters. The meals were served by the Chamnag Monastery.   

**A:**  He had a lot of people sending him gifts and presents from Lhasa, and he had a nice time.   

**Q:**  Were there others who offered him presents?   

**A:**  Since he had been serving the late Dalai Lama with devotion, there were many people who admired and loved him. So Janglojen and Kujar stayed for three or four years, and they were planning to run away. They would meet very often to plan their escape.   

**Q:**  I heard that Kujar would sometimes go to Janglojen's place and Janglojen would sometimes go to Kujar's place.   

**A:**  Then they ran away.   

**Q:**  I heard that after successfully running away, they sent messages to their friends in Lhasa saying that they were safe in India. Until that time, the authorities in Kongpo were not aware of their escape.   

**A:**  They must have felt tremendous relief after reaching India.   

**Q:**  Before Reting became the regent, who first proposed his name?   

**A:**  The ex-Ganden Tripa, Tresur Rimpoche Champa Chödrag [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟུར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་བྱམས་པ་ཆོས་གྲགས], rolled the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> in front of the Avalokitesvara statue in Tse.   

**Q:**  Yes, that's true. But before they roll the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a>, someone must propose and nominate the candidates. Who first proposed Reting's name?   

**A:**  I don't know who proposed Reting's name. The names nominated for the regency were Reting, Phurjok [Tib. ཕུར་ལྕོག] Rimpoche and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a> called Minyag Ame [Tib. མི་ཉག་ཨ་མེས]. They were the three nominees.   

**Q:**  How were they selected?   

**A:**  Yes. First, three people's name were selected.   

**Q:**  How were these three selected?   

**A:**  I don't know how they were selected.   

**Q:**  Before this, how was the relationship between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> [and] Reting? According to Lungshar's son, Lungshar Changchub la [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ་ལགས], it was Lungshar who first proposed Reting's name. I doubt that because, at that time, Lungshar's ambition was to make himself powerful by climbing up the power structure. Despite his denials of such ambition, it was a fact. With such ambition, it is difficult to digest the fact that he would have proposed Reting's name for the regency.   

**A:**  I had not heard anything like that. However, there must have been a standard procedure to be followed.   

**Q:**  I heard that according to tradition, the nominees for the regency are selected as follows. One nominee is selected from all the lamas whose predecessors have been regents, Gyeltrü [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྤྲུལ] with the rank of Huthokthu [Tib. ཧུ་ཐོག་ཐུ]. Another candidate is selected from the famous and popular lamas from another circle. One candidate is from the Ganden Tripa. That was the tradition. Among the Gyeltrü, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> was very young, and so was not eligible. My late father had been disgraced and he had a wife. Therefore, Reting was the only eligible one.   

**A:**  No, at that time, your father hadn't taken the consort.   

**Q:**  He had.   

**A:**  No, because we are talking about the Water Bird Year, when the Dalai Lama died.   

**Q:**  I see. Anyway, Reting was the only eligible [person].   

**A:**  I remember reading a translation of the book written by Sir Basel Gould. He was the Political Officer of the Sikkim. He had written that there were two possible candidates for the regency among the Gyeltrü. One had fallen from grace because of making a cursing [Tib. ངན་གཏད] against the 13th Dalai Lama. Hence, only Reting was left.   

**Q:**  Phurjok Rimpoche was the candidate out of the contemporary famous lamas, and from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a>, Tresur Rimpoche declined the offer. Therefore, Minyag Ame was chosen as the third candidate.   

**A:**  Yes. I remember about the Gyeltrü. It was also written in the book. I think it was a tradition that one candidate should come from the Gyeltrü.   

**Q:**  Yes. However, during that time, there was only one eligible Gyeltrü.   

**A:**  That's right.   

**Q:**  I think this explanation is more acceptable. I don't think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> proposed Reting's name for the regency.   

**A:**  The 13th Dalai Lama passed away in the Year of the Water Bird, in the 10th month. Before that, in the fourth or fifth month, the Dalai Lama went to the Reting Monastery during the summer for the religious festival Kuyug Chöpa [Tib. ཁུ་བྱུག་མཆོད་པ]. Kungö Ta Lama was also with the Dalai Lama when he stayed one night in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and then when he passed the Phempo Gola [Tib. འཕན་པོ་སྒོ་ལ] Pass. At that time, Ta Lama was the among the members of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> [in the Dalai Lama's Secretariat].   

**Q:**  I wonder why he went there?   

**A:**  According to what I heard, though I cannot vouch for the authenticity of the source, they say that while in Reting, the Dalai Lama gave away his personal dice with which he used to do his divinations, along with the manuscripts he used for this. He was supposed to have said that "I have been using these and they have proven to be good. If you also use them, it will prove useful for you too." This gesture was taken as informal approval of Reting for the regency by the late Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  A <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> or someone else is also supposed to have predicted that there would be no need to do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> or divine lottery, and that the candidate born in the Year of Dog would win. Have you heard of this?   

**A:**  I have never heard this. I wonder who said this.   

**Q:**  He was referring to Reting who was born in the Year of the Dog, or was it the Bird Year? I heard it from somewhere.   

**A:**  Anyway, these selections for the regency took place in the Year of the Bird.   

**Q:**  Was Reting only 20 years old at that time?   

**A:**  I think he must have been around 20 years old.   

**Q:**  Was he 22, 23 or 24 years old?   

**A:**  Was he?   

**Q:**  Can you tell me which happened first, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> problem or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] trouble?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble happened first.   

**Q:**  That's true. How did this trouble start?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble started in the Kham area. Panda Tobgye [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱས] was commissioned as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and his mission was to go to Kham and organize the militia. I think he was given muskets by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office. After he had left for Kham, the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, and shortly after, Kujar was punished. Therefore, they rebelled. That's what the people were saying. Anyway, the trouble started from Kham, but at that time, what we saw were the sudden meetings that were convened in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Reting already the regent?   

**A:**  Yes. He had ascended the throne on the 10th of the first month of the Hound Year. We heard that when they went to put the seal of confiscation on Panda’s door, they had barred their door and wouldn't permit anyone to enter. At that time, one of Panda’s servants accidentally shot their rifle and it created a lot of tension. He was the person called Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན] who [later] lived in Kalimpong for some time. Later, he might have been shut up (detained) in Nangtsesha. After much tension, the Chandzö of Phabongkha and Lingchag la [Tib. གླིང་ཕྱག་ལགས], who later became the monk guard [simgag, Tib. gzim 'gag], acted as the mediator from Panda’s side.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he the one called Chöyang [Tib. ཆོས་དབྱངས] of Ling?   

**A:**  Yes, he was a bearded guy.   

**Q:**  Was he [the guy] from Drepung who was known as the Chöyang of Ling?   

**A:**  Yes, I think he was the one. There were seven or eight such people acting as the mediators. We had gone there to watch what was happening as spectators. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> House's main gates were closed, but they were using the small entrances through the neighboring shops.   

**Q:**  Why couldn't the police break in?   

**A:**  Because of the accidental shot, they feared that if they tried to break in forcefully, a bloody gun battle might start. So, because of the mediator's efforts, for the time being, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> house was surrounded by policemen, but later, everything was settled.   

**Q:**  Why did the government let the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> family off so easily?   

**A:**  I have no idea at all.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was a street song, "From the golden house of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>, golden messages were sent; <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> on his rooftop was busy counting the gold coins [Tib. གསེར་ཁྱིམ་སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང་ནས། གསེར་གྱི་བརྡ་མོ་བཏང་སོང། ས་དབང་ཁྲི་སྨོན་ཐོག་ཁ། [rest unclear]]."   

**A:**  Was there? I guess one has to offer bribes to the right quarters.   

**Q:**  Secondly, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had some other problems to face. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] The name of the (political) party started by Lungshar after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. It translates roughly as, &quot;all joined together in happiness.&quot;">Kyichog Kundü</a> Party was about to start, wasn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, most probably.   

**Q:**  Due to these problems which <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had to face, he let <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> off easily. That's what people have told me. I don't know whether this is true or not.   

**A:**  I guess that it is one of the main reasons. However, to the people in general, it was known as Panda’s Rebellion.   

**Q:**  Then later, was Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  Nornang was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> [in Kham], but he ran away.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> later compensated Nornang for all of his property that had been looted or damaged during the attack [in Kham Panda Topgye]. Since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> had run away, they took the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, Thubden Sangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཟང་པོ], as a prisoner. I heard he was the salt tax collector [tshasho, Tib. tshwa zho] or the tea tax collector [Tib. ཇ་ཤོ].   

**A:**  He was probably the tog magpön [Tib. ཏོག་དམག་དཔོན].   

**Q:**  What was the tog magpön?   

**A:**  It was a position in Kham. It was very similar to that. So, they took the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> as a prisoner. He suffered a lot of ill treatment, like being crucified [gyangshing, Tib. rgyang shing]. But later, they let him off, as they realized that he was an innocent victim. I heard things like that. He returned to Lhasa shortly [after].   

**Q:**  According to what I have heard, they took him as a prisoner and tied him to a horse. Then when they realized that he was innocent, the guards were told to let him go. I talked about this with a person who had actually talked with one of them. The guards, judging from his bearings, found him to be a high official and when they asked him, he said that he was an important government official.   

**A:**  They treated him very cruelly.   

**Q:**  Did they really torture him?   

**A:**  Until they reached their destination, they brought him with his hands tied.   

**Q:**  The captors were mounted and he had to trot along on his feet with his hands tied together. Sometimes when he couldn't keep up the pace, he would be dragged along. Later, when he was released, he thought that he had been able to escape with his own initiative. But in reality, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> had instructed the guards to let him go.   

**A:**  I haven't heard about this episode.   

**Q:**  So then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] The name of the (political) party started by Lungshar after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. It translates roughly as, &quot;all joined together in happiness.&quot;">Kyichog Kundü</a> Party was formed. Can you tell us how it was originally formed?   

**A:**  It was organized by Lungshar. When he asked people to join it, a lot of people enrolled their names, and then it became all the rage and everyone joined it because they saw all the others joining it. They did not know the real purpose of why this party was raised by Lungshar. They had their headquarters near the house of Seshing [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ] in one of the numerous work hostels facing Jangsebshar [Tib. ལྕང་གསེབ་ཤར]. Tsidrung Kongtrug la [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྲུག་ལགས] used to live there. They used to meet there. Kyitö la [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་ལགས] was the landlord.   

**Q:**  They used to meet there?   

**A:**  Yes. The members used to fix their names and seals in that house. Most of the members did not know what the Party's inner aim was. They only knew the aims and purposes as listed in the Party's petition. They saw that there was no problem.   

**Q:**  According to the widely publicized petition, did they write, "Until the 14th Dalai Lama comes of age to assume power, the appointment of any high official must be discussed and confirmed in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>. The Regent cannot appoint any high post without the tsondu's approval." Is this true?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea. But, if there were some errors and something in excess, then it would not have been okay. There probably wasn't any problem with the petition. Though <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the ringleader and knew all of the internal and external works. Later, some people were demoted, like Janglojen, Gyankhar Nangpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ], Menriwa [Tib. སྨན་རི་བ], Kongtrugla, Drakton [Tib. བྲག་ཐོན], and Kyitöpa.   

**Q:**  There were eight of them?   

**A:**  Lhalu's son and Chapa were also two of them.   

**Q:**  At that time, wasn't Lhalu's son only 13 or 14 years old?   

**A:**  No. He had already joined the government service and he had come to learn about the workings of the artillery at Trapchi.   

**Q:**  Are you sure that he wasn't a very young boy?   

**A:**  No. He had joined the government service as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> and had come to learn about artillery.   

**Q:**  People say that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] The name of the (political) party started by Lungshar after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. It translates roughly as, &quot;all joined together in happiness.&quot;">Kyichog Kundü</a> had two documents, an inner and an outer one. Is this true? <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> said that there were two. He claimed that he had seen the inner one, too.   

**A:**  I wouldn't know much about this except for having some general knowledge about it. The Party's main aim, according to the outer document, was to bring about an improvement in the country. If this was the case, he would not lose his eyeballs, right? Then there is the story that some piece of paper was found in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s boots with potent black magic to kill his opponent on which it was written, "Press <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> Norbu Wangyal [Tib. ཀྲི་སྨོན་ནོར་བུ་དབང་རྒྱལ་གནོན]."   

**Q:**  But surely for such reasons he wouldn't have received such a cruel punishment?   

**A:**  That was what everyone was made to believe. But the real reason was that he was punished for conspiring [Tib. ངན་གྲོས]. That was all I knew.   

**Q:**  I heard that they hadn't distributed pamphlets like was done in Reting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in Reting they distributed pamphlets. Otherwise, in Tibet, the practice of distributing pamphlets is not known at all. The pamphlets were distributed in Reting because the two labrangs suspected each other. Therefore, they had to print the correspondence Reting sent to Beijing and distribute it. They didn't have any choice but to distribute it.   

**Q:**  I also heard that they also distributed pamphlets during the Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] incident. People say that it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> who disclosed the fact that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] The name of the (political) party started by Lungshar after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. It translates roughly as, &quot;all joined together in happiness.&quot;">Kyichog Kundü</a> Party members were holding various secret meetings. Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes, I also heard [things] like that.   

**Q:**  How did this happen?   

**A:**  According to what we heard as outsiders, the various meetings were held at Kongtrug la's place, who was a tenant of Seshing.   

**Q:**  This was the single story house near our house, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So, the party members used to gather there to discuss and plan their programs, and to put their seals on documents. Now, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> could see them entering and leaving the room somewhere from Jangsebshar. It was Kapshöba who told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས] The name of the (political) party started by Lungshar after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. It translates roughly as, &quot;all joined together in happiness.&quot;">Kyichog Kundü</a> were holding meetings.   

**Q:**  Was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> himself at any of these meetings?   

**A:**  No, there was no talk about this.   

**Q:**  Still, it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> who claimed that he had seen both the inner and outer documents of the Party.   

**A:**  Yes, that's what has been said. But according to what I had heard, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> climbed somewhere from Jangsebshar, and spied and disclosed their meetings. From this, we can assume that he, himself, had not attended the meetings.   

**Q:**  Later, were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> brought together and cross-examined?   

**A:**  Yes. I am not sure whether or not they were brought face to face and interrogated. Finally, both were imprisoned. All of this took place in the third or fourth month. In that same year, on the occasion of the Tsongkhapa's Death Anniversary, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྔ་མཆོད] The Ganden Ngamjö holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ngamjö</a> [Tib. ལྔ་མཆོད], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was re-admitted into government service. Earlier he had been expelled from government service.   

**Q:**  At that time, both <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s properties were confiscated?   

**A:**  Yes. Both of them were punished. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was also demoted from government service.   

**Q:**  Why did they demote him?   

**A:**  I wonder what kind of orders they gave him. However, I am sure that he was demoted from government service, but in the same year, on the occasion of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྔ་མཆོད] The Ganden Ngamjö holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ngamjö</a>, he was re-employed as an ordinary lay official. I am dead sure about this. Then again, after 5 or 6 months, he was promoted to Tsipön Lempar [Tib. རྩིས་དཔོན་ལས་འཕར] and worked in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office.   

**Q:**  I see. That was a very quick promotion. Can you tell me how <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> ran away to Drepung?   

**A:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had run away to Drepung. That was all. I don't know the details.   

**Q:**  Janglojen and Kongtrug la were dismissed when the party was dissolved, [right]?   

**A:**  There were many others besides them.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were about 170 of them.   

**A:**  From among them, I am not sure whether or not one is guilty, but Janglojen, Kongtrug la, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a>, Drakton, Menri, Gyankhar Nangpa, and Chapa Sey were all exiled.   

**Q:**  Later, when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was imprisoned, did they shut him in a very bad prison or was he kept kind of in a lenient way?   

**A:**  He was kept at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> until his eyeballs were gouged out.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he shut up in at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Pargang [Tib. ཞོལ་པར་ཁང]?   

**A:**  No. He was not kept at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> for more than 15 to 20 days. The sentence passed rather quickly. From there he was brought to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>, and there his eyeballs were taken out and he was kept there for the rest of the period.   

**Q:**  Was there any further discussion about him?   

**A:**  After he was kept in the prison, they had passed their judgment and that was it.   

**Q:**  When he was imprisoned, do you think he was given any special treatment, or was he treated like a common criminal?   

**A:**  I don't think he was given any special treatment. However, I heard that Lhalu's wife used to bring him food. Except for this, he was treated like a common criminal.   

**Q:**  Who was in charge of building the golden stupa?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> Trimön, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> Ramba, and Tsipön Trogawo [Tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བོ], were in charge.   

**Q:**  Then the Guomindang and the Indian representatives came to offer their condolences when the 13th Dalai Lama passed away. Were there any restrictions?   

**A:**  I don't think there were any restrictions. However, I think they had to send a formal letter of request with the number of delegation members specified.   

**Q:**  I see. There were no restrictions?   

**A:**  I think our government was not in a position to deny such a request.   

**Q:**  What is your opinion about the book written by Künsangtse about Reting going to the see the vision of the holy lake of Shri Devi, Lhamo Lamtso [Tib. ལྷ་མོ་བླ་མཚོ], and finding the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  I found the book very factual and accurate.   

**Q:**  Were there any important details omitted or missing?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anyone comment about any details being left out.   

**Q:**  Künsangtse has written about finding the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama in great detail. When Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] was being renovated, Liushar and Shasur were in charge, [right]?   

**A:**  Kungö Parkhang, the famous one who became the Katsab (acting Kalön), was in charge of the renovation overall. His real name is Gyentsen Phüntso. At that time, he was in Lhoka. He was born in a big house near Jalung Jatsa Lhagang [Tib. ཇ་ལུང་བྱ་ཚ་ལྷ་ཁང]. He is also well-known as Khenche Gyentsen Phüntso. Liushar was the estate manager [like a dzongpön]. Wön Shidö [Tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] and Shasur were his helpers.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Panchen Lama was in China. There was some talk about him coming to Tibet with a large number of bodyguards and so on. Can you tell me something about this?   

**A:**  The Panchen Lama had come from Beijing with a large number of bodyguards to Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ]. All of his bodyguards were Chinese and when this news reached Lhasa, they held a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> assembly meeting in Lhasa. In the meeting, they said that they would be very happy if the Panchen Lama returned to Tibet, but they would never permit his so-called Chinese military escorts to come with him. Since he was coming to Tibet, the Tibetan government would take total responsibility for his safety and welfare, but he must return all the Chinese escorts. This decision was conveyed to the Panchen Lama. However, the Panchen Lama did not agree with this. The government offered another alternative. "Since the Panchen Lama insists on bringing the Chinese military escorts, then the [Tibetan] government is willing to let him enter Tibet provided that an agreement is made that the Chinese escort him up to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and stay there for a limited period of time," like a month or two. "A third country, like India, must vouch and witness this agreement. Otherwise, the Tibetan government shall not let him enter Tibet." The Panchen Lama was still not willing to accept this proposition. At that time, Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] Rimpoche happened to go down to the Kham area. There he met the Panchen Lama who told him to speak to the Tibetan government on his behalf. The Governor of Kham, Doji Sursur [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར] [he was Surkhang Sawangchemmo's father who had separated from the main household], went and told the Panchen Lama that he was welcome to enter Tibet, but his Chinese escorts were not welcome and he must send them back.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese escorts were there? Around 500 soldiers?   

**A:**  I don't remember the number exactly. Eventually, the Doji made it clear that if he tried to enter Tibet with his Chinese escorts, the Tibetan soldiers would intercept them. So the Panchen Lama wanted to come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, but due to the disagreement about his Chinese escorts, he could not proceed. The government sent some instructions to the bureau at Nanjing.   

**Q:**  Who was the head of the Nanjing Bureau?   

**A:**  Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was most probably the person in charge.   

**A:**  From Beijing, they sent a wire to the Panchen Lama saying that his Chinese escorts should be sent back and that they should not go with him to Tashilhunpo. Although the Panchen Lama himself is a lama and it wouldn't bother him, in the common view of people, it didn't work out [Tib. མ་འགྲིགས་པ]. The Chinese themselves were telling him to send back the soldiers. So this caused a lot of embarrassment to his staff. Understandably, he was disappointed and angry. He died shortly after at Rakshi Lungshökor. The dispute between China and Japan was started concerning a bridge.   

**Q:**  Through the Nanjing Bureau, the Tibetan government had talked with Beijing, [right]?   

**A:**  They had instructed the Nanjing Bureau to talk with Beijing.   

**Q:**  Actually, the Chinese had appointed the Panchen Lama as "The great intellectual governor of the western region [Tib. ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་ས་ཁུལ་གྱི་ཤེས་ཡོན་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཆེན་མོ]." Therefore, befitting of his rank, they would send soldiers as his personal bodyguard.   

**A:**  That's true, but we could not let the Chinese soldiers enter our country. There were about four to five hundred Chinese soldiers. Economically speaking, they would have had some money with them, but otherwise, all of the expenditures had to be borne by us.   

**Q:**  All of these arrangements would have been made by the Panchen Labrang?   

**A:**  Even if it was borne by the Panchen Labrang, still, it is our country.   

**Q:**  Have you read the autobiography of Phabongkha Rimpoche?   

**A:**  I have not read it.   

**Q:**  In it, he mentions how he had gone to all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> with whom he had some religious affiliation and pleaded with them to use their influence to let the Panchen Lama enter Tibet along with his Chinese escorts. Five hundred Chinese soldiers were nothing compared to the harmful effects it would have had on Buddhism if the Panchen Lama was denied entry into Tibet. Phabongkha personally volunteered to vouch for these soldiers. Reting had replied saying that "The decision to deny entry to the Panchen Lama if he insisted on bringing the Chinese escorts was passed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, which is very important. And there are many people attending the tsondu. Therefore, I cannot reverse the decision."   

**A:**  I heard that Reting sent the abbots and representatives of the three great monasteries, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and the fourth rank official, Rimshi Doring [Tib. རིམ་བཞི་རྡོ་རིང], to receive the Panchen Lama with the same message. At that time, what the Doji told the Panchen Lama was "It would be better if you could come to Tibet without your Chinese escorts. However, if you insist upon bringing them, they must decide upon a limited period of time after which the Chinese soldiers must leave Tibet. This agreement should be witnessed and vouched by a third country. If you try to enter Tibet contrary to these conditions, Tibetan soldiers will have to intercept them."   

**Q:**  Phabongkha has written that all of these problems were caused by [the protector deity] Shungden [Tib. ཤུགས་ལྡན]. There is a chapel of Shungden in Tashilhunpo. Then in the Earth Ox Year, Reting resigned from the regency. During Reting's regency, who were the new shape appointed by him?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a>, Phünkang [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང], and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Tempa Jayan [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] were appointed as new the shapes by Reting.   

**Q:**  Then Reting Rimpoche went on a pilgrimage and visited the famous lake of visions. After that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was granted his request to resign. How did this happen?   

**A:**  According to one version, someone told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> that if he resigned from his post, there was a very good chance that he would be reappointed as an associate with the regent [Tib. སྲིད་སྐྱོང་ཕྱག་རོགས]. Keeping that in mind, Trimön asked permission to resign and it was granted very fast. Within two or three days, he was allowed to resign. This is written very clearly in Künsangtse's book. In it, he mentions that Trimön was one of the senior-most kalön. He was an old government official and had a very broad and good knowledge about the government. I think the book was written rather well, based on facts without being partial.   

**Q:**  I see. Was it published?   

**A:**  The Tibetan Library in Dharamsala has a copy.   

**Q:**  According to what you have heard, is it really true that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was to be made associate of the regent?   

**A:**  I think it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> or someone, I cannot remember the name, who suggested to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> to resign. Anyway, there was somebody who tricked Trimön.   

**Q:**  Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> became slightly crazy. Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes, it is true.   

**Q:**  Did you see him?   

**A:**  Yes, I saw him. After losing his senses, he roamed everywhere. Sometimes he would wear a white lower garment of the monks, shamthab, and go in the Wongtö Shinga [Tib. འོན་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག] market.   

**Q:**  I heard that he was also playing the cymbals.   

**A:**  This really happened.   

**Q:**  Did he really lose his mind or was he just acting crazy?   

**A:**  I don't think he was acting. He lived for two to three years in such a state and then died.   

**Q:**  What was the cause of his death?   

**A:**  I don't know about that.   

**Q:**  During Reting's reign, the biggest trouble was concerning <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> [Tib. ཁྱུང་རམ]. Besides that, there were no cases where Reting had to face any harsh judgment. The case of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s punishment was entirely different.   

**A:**  They say that it was the Prime Minister who finally put the approval mark [Tib. ཕྱག་རྟགས] on the verdict to blind Lungshar. Reting, being a lama, could not sanction such a harsh judgment, so it was the Prime Minister who put the approval mark on the verdict.   

**Q:**  How did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> problem begin?   

**A:**  Künsangtse has mentioned in his book that once they held a meeting at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> to discuss how to reward Reting for his efficient services rendered while finding the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. On this occasion, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> stood up and said that "Since the Dalai Lama, the main owner [Tib. དོན་གྱི་བདག་པོ] of the religion, is no longer among us, none of us have the right to give any gifts to anyone." So there were some arguments and in the process, Khyungram said, "After gobbling up the mountain, still [he] was not full, and after drinking up the ocean, still it didn't quench his thirst [Tib. རི་བོ་ཟོས་ནས་མ་འགྲངས། རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཏུངས་ནས་མ་ངོམས]." The abbot, Töpa Khembo [Tib. སྟོད་པ་མཁན་པོ], asked him if he was accusing Reting. Khyungram said, "I did not say his name, but if you choose to interpret it like that, then so be it." This statement caused a lot of ill feelings towards him. So when he was the Governor of Hor [Tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི], there were many talks that his visits to the various places in Hor were creating a lot of hardships on the people. This petition of complaint was written by one of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s clerks called something like Phurbu. He had not left Lhasa at all, but he just submitted the petition. Based on this, they summoned Khyungram and dismissed him from government service at once and confiscated his property.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> was summoned, did he come immediately?   

**A:**  Yes. He was first summoned to Reting Labrang, Shö ga (Secretariat). There he was immediately arrested and handed over to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Office. His house and property were confiscated. Finally, when they issued the verdict, he was whipped, and made to ride on an ox, paraded through the streets and exiled to Ruthok [in far western Tibet].   

**Q:**  Wasn't that place called Thulin?   

**A:**  Thulin is part of Ruthok. He died there trying to seek permission to return. I think he was quite old. Before he fell from grace, he was one of the more respected officials of the government.   

**Q:**  During the time when Reting said that either Langdon should resign or he would resign, Song [Tib. ཟོང] Rimpoche told me that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> was one of the strongest supporters who insisted in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> that Reting should continue as the regent.   

**A:**  That means that later a contradiction developed, right?   

**Q:**  This contradiction developed over his appointment as shape.   

**A:**  Yes, people say that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>'s real wish or ambition was that he should be appointed as a shape.   

**Q:**  Maybe his ambition was much more than becoming a shape. That's the reason why he came up from Hor where he was the governor. From Hor, he came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> with great pomp and show. Everyone was saying that he was on his way to becoming a shape. So at Drigung, everyone treated him as a shape and Drigung formally offered him scarves, as they would to a shape. Könchog Samden [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་བསམ་གཏན] told me that when he was a child, he was at Drigung and his father was at Drigung when [they] offered scarves to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> as a representative of Reting Labrang. He said that Khyungram was carried in a kind of palanquin called [Tib. do lo ? [unclear]] wearing a woolen gown. Wasn't his father in the Reting faction?   

**A:**  Yes, his father was the son of the trader Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]. Later, it was written in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>'s verdict that he was carried in a kind of palanquin as one of the cases when he brought a lot of hardships to the people with his extravagant traveling style where all the others were riding horses.   

**Q:**  Later, with Jedrung la's [Phünkang's son] influence and support, Phünkang got the post of shape.   

**A:**  Phünkang became the shape.   

**Q:**  So, at that time, it was only <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> whom Reting had to punish and there were no other such cases?   

**A:**  There were no other cases. He ruled as a regent for seven years. Hound, Boar, Mouse, Ox, Tiger, Hare and Dragon were the exact years.   

**Q:**  After coming to the throne, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s first appointment to the post of shape was Surkhang?   

**A:**  Correct.   

**Q:**  Was he appointed when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> Shape passed away?   

**A:**  I don't remember in whose place Surkhang was appointed as a shape, but when he became a shape, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was alive. He most probably became the shape in place of Nangchungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ] who had been made to resign.   

**Q:**  Why was Nangchungwa made to resign?   

**A:**  It was like this. A shape was always sent as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</a>. However, for some time, no shape was able to go down [to Chamdo]. So the doji was entrusted to two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>: a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and a lay official. Again, after a certain period, they said that a shape must preside as doji. Therefore, it was Nangchungwa's turn to get the governorship. So they said that a real shape shall be the doji and then he went down. After his tenure, no new shape came to replace him. Instead, Dzasa Yuthok was appointed as doji. Normally, when the old doji finished his term, he needed to hand over his post, along with the accounts, to the new one, and he needed brief him. But Nangchungwa did not do so. So when he reached Lhasa, he was demoted to dzasa or something. In his place, Surkhang was made as the new shape.   

**Q:**  Who was next to be appointed as the shape? Wasn't a street song <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> at that time about the ox something?   

**A:**  It was like this, "The horns of the ox were broken and the prayer flag was hoisted in the corner [Tib. གླང་གི་རྭ་ཅོ་བཅག་ནས། ཟུར་ལ་དར་ལྕོག་བཙུགས་སོང]."   

**Q:**  It was also sung like this, "They built the wall with gold and they hoisted the prayer flag in the corner [Tib. གསེར་གྱི་རྩིག་པ་བཙིགས་ནས། ཟུར་ལ་དར་ལྕོག་བཙུགས་སོང]." Who was the second?   

**A:**  First was Surkhang, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>, Lhalu and Ngabö respectively. Lhalu was appointed in Phünkang's place.   

**Q:**  When did you join the government service?   

**A:**  I joined in the Year of the Wood Bird. I joined while <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was the regent.   

**Q:**  Was it two to three years after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> became the regent?   

**A:**  It was two or three years before that.   

**Q:**  Was it in the Fire Boar or Iron-Tiger Year?   

**A:**  It was the Wood-Bird Year.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> ascend the throne in the Year of the Snake?   

**A:**  Horse, Sheep, Monkey and Bird.   

**Q:**  I see. You joined in the Year of the Bird. So, during <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s reign, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> became a shape and he created a lot of confusion and problems. Do you know how much Kapshöba bribed as the payment offer [Tib. སྐྱབས་འཛིན] when he was chosen as a shape?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  They say he promised to pay a huge sum. However, later he could not give the sum that he had promised, right?   

**A:**  Could be.   

**Q:**  If you look at all the shape appointed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, it might seem that he appointed them because of their rich financial contributions, but in reality, that is not why. The fact is that a heavy rivalry existed between Reting Labrang and Taktra Labrang. Do you think this is true?   

**A:**  It could have been like that.   

**Q:**  Let's take Surkhang for example. One of his estates in Gyantse had been lost to Reting. So is the case with Kapshöba. On top of that, when Phünkang fell from grace, Lhalu was appointed as the shape in his place. This makes it quite obvious that all the shapes appointed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> were people who did not get along with the Reting estate. Actually, wasn't it Taktra who appointed Lhalu as the shape?   

**A:**  No, it was Reting.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me how Lhalu got into government service?   

**A:**  I have a murky knowledge about it. Now, Lhalu was without a job because he was demoted. So he had to file a petition asking for a job in the government.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s punishment included that all of his descendants shall not be permitted to join government service.   

**A:**  Lhalu claimed that his real father was not Lungshar. He claimed that he was Shelkar Lingpa [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིང་པ] Depön's son.   

**Q:**  Was that the one who fled to India [with the 13th Dalai Lama]?   

**A:**  This was his father and he was an excellent tsipön.   

**Q:**  What about his mother?   

**A:**  She was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s legitimate wife. She was Lhalu's and the twisted mouth, Porkyok's [Tib. སྤོར་ཀྱོག], mother. So Lhalu was permitted to work for the government. Later, when Kujar and Janglojen ran away from Kongpo, they wrote petitions that they should be allowed to return to Lhasa. However, their petitions did not bear fruit. I don't know who opposed Janglojen's petitions, but Tempa Jayan and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> strongly opposed Kujar's pleas.   

**Q:**  I see. Why was that?   

**A:**  When Kujar was in power, he never did like them. Kujar had demoted Tempa Jayan to be an ordinary <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> along with the famous Parkhang. Therefore, as revenge, these two exerted their considerable influence and did not let Kujar return. So when Kujar and Janglojen were escaping, while in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>, they sent a letter. You must have heard about it?   

**Q:**  No, I have never heard about it.   

**A:**  The gist of the letter is, "Lhalusey, the son of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, who falsely claims to be Shelkar Lingpa's son, has been accepted into government service with the post of Senampa, but the government has ignored our petitions to return to our own land. This is because Tibetan land is uneven (unfair) [Tib. ལུང་ཕྲུག་ལྷ་སྲས་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ཤེལ་མདར་བརྫུས་ནས་སྲས་རྣམ་པའི་གོ་མོང་ཐོབ་ནས་རྒུ་རྐྱེན་གྱི་ཞུ་སྒོ་འཕིགས། ཕྲན་གཉིས་རང་ཡུལ་དུ་ལོག་འཐུས་ཞུས་པར་དོན་སྨིན་མ་སོན་པ་ནི། བོད་ཡུལ་སྒང་གཤོངས་མ་སྙོམས་པའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་ཡིན]." Kujar later told me that it had been drafted by Janglojen, although he persuaded him not to write it. So this proves that when these two were going away, Lhalu had already joined the government service.   

**Q:**  Why did they write that?   

**A:**  It was probably because they were to pass the border in one or two days. So they just wrote it when they were angry.   

**Q:**  After listening to various people, we came to realize that it was done by old lady Lhalu. People say that she pleaded to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> and it was he who made it possible for her son to be accepted into government service. Do you have any idea about this?   

**A:**  I have no idea at all about this.   

**Q:**  Then, in 1949, a lot of people were kicked out because they were supposed to be working for the Guomindang or Communist China. Can you tell us something about them?   

**A:**  This decision was passed during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu gyepa (the Large Abbreviated Assembly). They had a very good idea as to who those working for the Chinese were. Of course, they did not know who were working for the Communists or Guomindang, but they picked up the people who were definitely working for either one of them. At first, they entered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> house.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by that?   

**A:**  It was like this. I was in my room and I happened to look out through the window, and I saw about two to three hundred soldiers in their best dress, fully armed, marching down the street. The officers were leading them armed carrying Mauser pistols. Normally, in the Lhasa streets, you wouldn't see soldiers marching so silently. Whenever they came, there was a lot of noise, the bands playing some tunes and so on. I started wondering why they had come. They were wearing their best uniforms.   

**Q:**  Did they have two types of uniforms-a better and an ordinary uniform?   

**A:**  They were in their parade uniforms. So, we started asking ourselves, "What could be the reason for this?" They passed by my house and carried on. I sent my servant to find out where they were going and what the reason could possibly be. He told me that the soldiers had blocked most of the paths of the main gate of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> and the northern side door called Chötrikhang [Tib. ཆོས་ཁྲི་ཁང]. They wouldn't let anyone enter the Tsuglagang. Later, I realized that the members of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu gyepa had gone from there and gathered for a meeting at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a>. From Tse, they entered the gate, Lubu Gyelgo [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག་རྒྱལ་སྒོ], and went up through Yuthok to Tse. Then they started arresting the Chinese spies.   

**Q:**  Did all members of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> come?   

**A:**  Yes, all of the members of the hragdu gyepa.   

**Q:**  You mean, all of them came riding on horses?   

**A:**  I was told that there were lots of riders. Also, I was told that the people of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Labrang knew about these activities, but still they were yet to execute their orders. So when they came through the Lubu Gyelgo, it was said that people in the Phodrang Sarpa were alarmed.   

**Q:**  Why would they have gotten alarmed?   

**A:**  It just happened. I mean, sometimes the government makes sudden persecutions like they did to Reting's labrang. To make it worse, there were always rumors which made people feel uncertain.   

**Q:**  But they knew about this in advance?   

**A:**  That is the funny part. Despite their knowledge in advance, when the real thing happened, they panicked for a while. Anyway, they arrested and expelled the Chinese spies.   

**Q:**  You mean they stayed near the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> house and shouted?   

**A:**  They held the meeting inside the Tsuglagang.   

**Q:**  You mean the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the representatives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> and the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Then where did the soldiers go?   

**A:**  The soldiers had been posted near the gate, Lügong Sango [Tib. གླུད་འགོང་གསང་སྒོ], and the gate of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> and the teaching grove, Sungjö Rawa [Tib. གསུང་ཆོས་ར་བ].   

**Q:**  I see. They did not go inside?   

**A:**  No, it is against the law for the soldiers to enter the Tsuglagang. They took a few soldiers, but, fortunately, they did not have to make any arrests because they were able to convince them that they were guilty of spying, and therefore, should leave the country. Then the government sent a messenger (the person on duty) [Tib. སྡོད་བྱ] summoning me to the Kashag. On my way there, I picked up Tempa la, who was the caretaker of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, and then both of us went to the Kashag. Outside the Kashag, there were a lot of people. Ta Lama and Tsarong came out and told us that we should go to Trapchi.   

**Q:**  I see. You were sent as a staff member of Trapchi.   

**A:**  So, they told us to go there and further instructed us that should we need the military, they would send it from the headquarters. We were to stay there until the present crisis was over. We must keep a strict vigil over there since the mint and armory were situated there. So we went.   

**Q:**  They did not specify precisely what your jobs were?   

**A:**  We knew what we had to do since the government armory and mint were situated at Trapchi.   

**Q:**  At the time of instructions, did you two know exactly what the crisis was about or when the crisis was over?   

**A:**  We knew vaguely that it was something to do with the Chinese and the people at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> were to be expelled. So we left on the same day and stayed at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> for two or three days. At that time, the main thing was to expel the spies in the Kyitöpa house. The government would point out the spies and accuse them of their crimes with proof. So they had to leave. Among the private individuals, there was Phünwang la, and there was another individual who was more senior than Phünwang la who lived in Namdele [Tib. རྣམ་བདེ་ལེགས] House. I have seen him. Later, when I went to Beijing, he was still there. Besides them, there were a few more individuals. The whole incident was settled in two or three days.   

**Q:**  Did they make any protests?   

**A:**  At <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> there was a Chinese office, so they had to be kicked out. The office was there at their own insistence. They had not been invited by the Tibetan government. However, since it was an office, the government had to show proof of their crimes and then expel them. To the private individuals, the government did not have to give any proof or such things. The government could just have just said that they should leave their office. That's it. They had to leave. So we did not have to stay at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> for many days.   

**Q:**  How did they prepare the whole operation initially?   

**A:**  It was all done in secret.   

**Q:**  I heard that they placed the turquoise icon of Buddha on their heads and made them swear that no one shall let out the secret. Have you heard about this? I was told that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] Abbreviation of Trunyichemmo (heads of the Yigtsang) and Tsipön (heads of the Tsikhang).">trungtsi</a> held a meeting and Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was in charge of the whole operation.   

**A:**  No. I don't think that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was Tsipön at that time.   

**Q:**  He was a tsipön. Ngabö has written that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was a tsipön at that time. What were Phünkang, Surkhang, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> doing?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was being nominated by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> for the post of shape. While nominating him, they would have discussed among themselves and informed Ramba about their proposition.   

**Q:**  I see. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was a Ta Lama. Is there any difference between a Ta Lama and the trunyichemmo?   

**A:**  There is no difference. Sometimes they made the senior-most trunyichemmo the Ta Lama. Sometimes they didn't. They told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> that he must apply for the post of shape since he was the most deserving candidate. When Ramba went to the Regent to seek the post of shape, all the trunyichemmo went with him. Once he had presented his petition, he came out and the other trunyichemmo went in and requested the Regent to confer upon Ramba the rank of a shape. Thus, Ramba did not have to spend much money since the collective voice of the trunyichemmo carries a lot of weight. It was done rather nicely.   

**Q:**  Yes, I must say that this was very nice, but I have never heard about this before.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was a very nice person, and he got along well with everyone. Therefore, the decision to nominate Ramba for the post of shape was unanimous.   

**Q:**  I must say that it was done beautifully. Were all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Lama's nominated and selected from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they were.   

**Q:**  The other shapes were nominated by the Kashag?   

**A:**  That's correct.   

**Q:**  When Tempa Jayan la passed away, was it a natural death or were there any problems involved?   

**A:**  I don't think there were any problems.   

**Q:**  Some say that just before he died, he puked a lot of blood?   

**A:**  According to what I heard, all of a sudden he died due to fright. They say that a monkey of Ditru Labrang [sde phrug bla brang] got loose and entered his room through the window. The sudden fright must have been the cause.   

**Q:**  You mean the monkey of Ditru Labrang got loose?   

**A:**  I think one of his room's windows must have been facing north. The monkey entered through it. I don't know if this is true or not, but people were saying things like that. After this fright, he became ill and never recovered.   

**Q:**  He wasn't sick for long, was he?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't ill for long.   

**Q:**  Some say that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a>, who was displeased with him, caused him to die.   

**A:**  Don't you think that it was something like that?   

**Q:**  I guess so. At <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> [Tib. རྨེ་རུ] there is a shrine of Nechung.   

**A:**  Is that at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a>?   

**Q:**  Yes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> of Ditru Labrang.   

**A:**  This is called old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a>, which is near the gate Sera Tago [Tib. སེ་ར་ལྟག་སྒོ] of the Tsuglagang.   

**Q:**  Is it near the Gyükhang [Tib. རྒྱུད་ཁང] of Ditru Labrang?   

**A:**  The Ditru Labrang is near Muru. In fact, it is right next to it, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> and Reting Labrang   

**Q:**  I see. So, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was made the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama in an admirable way?   

**A:**  Yes. Everyone agreed.   

**Q:**  How about Lhalu?   

**A:**  Lhalu and Phünkang were very close friends.   

**Q:**  That's true. They must have nominated his name and submitted it to the Regent.   

**A:**  I don't know who nominated his name and so on.   

**Q:**  When Surkhang became the shape, who were the other candidates? I think Shasur was there, and who else was there?   

**A:**  Yuthok and Künsangtse were most likely there.   

**Q:**  I see. Künsangtse and Surkhang were related to each other [Kusangtse was Surkhang's father's brother]?   

**A:**  True, but they had to submit names of a few other candidates.   

**Q:**  Would the Kashag select the candidates?   

**A:**  The Kashag would nominate the candidates.   

**Q:**  Normally, when they were nominated or they applied for the post of shape, did they pretend that they didn't know anything about it?   

**A:**  Yes. Everyone pretended that they were not aware of it. They say that there was another way which was known as the recommendation <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> or Shumö Jeldar [Tib. ཞུ་མོས་མཇལ་དར]. Supposing there was a vacant post at Gyantse Dzong and all the applicants submitted their names, you could try the Shumö Jeldar way.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Shumö Jeldar was handled either by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] Administrative aide to the Kashag. There were usually two or three of these, all of whom were aristocratic lay officials.">kandrön</a> or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Aide/secretary to the Kashag. There were usually two of these, both aristocratic lay officials. Their job was to assist the Kalöns, and their usual work involved writing whatever letters, documents, orders, and recommendations the Kashag sent to the Dalai Lama and other offices. Their office was called the Dröndrungkhang [tib. མགྲོན་དྲུང་ཁང].">kadrung</a>. Since the kadrung had more power, he handled the Shumö Jeldar.   

**A:**  So, just as I said, when there was vacancy in a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, then the applicant went to one of the shapes and requested for him to help him get the post. And they had to offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> called Shumö Jeldar to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that it was handled by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Aide/secretary to the Kashag. There were usually two of these, both aristocratic lay officials. Their job was to assist the Kalöns, and their usual work involved writing whatever letters, documents, orders, and recommendations the Kashag sent to the Dalai Lama and other offices. Their office was called the Dröndrungkhang [tib. མགྲོན་དྲུང་ཁང].">kadrung</a> and he would keep the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> folded in his pouch. The Kashag discussed the vacant post and went through the name of the applicants. When the names of the individual came and when it was almost confirmed, the kadrung took out the khata and said that "I recommend such and such person, and here is the khata of recommendation." This was known as Shumö Jeldar, according to what I have heard. Even after the nationalization of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the estates, Kadrung Dumra did that and Surkhang scolded him saying, "The dzong and the estates have already been nationalized. Get the hell out of here!"   

**A:**  Dumra la was kind of powerful, right?   

**Q:**  He was famous too.   

**Q:**  During <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s reign, what were the major important happenings? The Sera trouble was one. Then there was Reting's trouble. Can you talk about how Reting's trouble started? Two shapes went to Reting to "invite" hi (to come with them to Lhasa). Was Reting aware that he was in trouble when they came?   

**A:**  I don't think he suspected anything.   

**Q:**  Is this for sure?   

**A:**  People told me that Reting definitely did not suspect anything. He was at his monastery which was situated above his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང] A summer cottage.">trokhang</a>, summer cottage. From the monastery, if you look down, you can see the trokhang. So he came down from the monastery to his trokhang and there the waiting soldiers brought him.   

**Q:**  Didn't the monks at monastery know that their head lama was being arrested?   

**A:**  I guess they didn't know for sure, but even if they did, they couldn't have done much because the soldiers were there.   

**Q:**  I heard that Lhagang Rimpoche dispatched a rider, a Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>, before the two shapes left for Reting to inform Reting Rimpoche.   

**A:**  I don't have very clear information about that.   

**Q:**  Where did this messenger go? What happened to him?   

**A:**  Even if the messenger had gone to Reting, what could he have done? Besides, when they were putting the seal of confiscation on Reting's property in Lhasa, Chöpön la and Jangsebshar Chöndze went to inform Reting Rimpoche. However, on the way, they saw Reting being brought back as a prisoner. So they hid.   

**Q:**  I doubt that they met Reting on the way. I heard that before they could meet Reting, the soldiers intercepted them and started firing upon them.   

**A:**  There was no firing at all when they arrested Reting and brought him to Lhasa. Chöpön la and Jangsebshar Chöndze, themselves, admitted that they were hiding when they saw Reting being brought in as a prisoner by the two shapes.   

**Q:**  I don't think that they met the lama, since they couldn't get through because the soldiers fired.   

**A:**  No, they didn't fire a single shot when they brought the Regent. That they had met him on the way is a well-known fact. After Reting was taken as prisoner, they left behind about 17 soldiers of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> (Regiment) to guard the labrang. However, the younger monks and the staff of Reting Labrang got together and killed the soldiers. Therefore, reinforcements arrived from Trapchi and that's how Reting Labrang's precious icons and property were damaged and looted. However, I must make it clear that during the whole episode, not a single shot was fired.   

**Q:**  Reting did not suspect anything, is that for sure?   

**A:**  He did not know. When the shape and guards came to his house, he must have only realized then that they had come to arrest him. He would have known the various reasons for which he was being charged. Otherwise, he had no idea at all that they were coming to arrest him.   

**Q:**  Is it true that he had contacted Beijing and sought out their help?   

**A:**  That's really true. There is written evidence. The person who took the letter and generally carried out the mission was a smart looking trader known as Gyagpön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> Thöndrub <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ].   

**Q:**  How did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> know about Reting's activities seeking Beijing's help? There is some talk about Kujar being involved in it.   

**A:**  People say that Kujar had knowledge about Reting's effort to seek Chinese help and he passed the information on to the Khendrönlosum. There was a lot of talk about Kujar, but he never told me about that. I only heard them from other people.   

**Q:**  At that time, people say that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> did not get on well among themselves. Each would employ men to spy upon the others.   

**A:**  I think that's possible.   

**Q:**  Actually, at that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> had attended the meetings of the Guomindang [Ch. guo min da hui].   

**A:**  Were they the same <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a>?   

**Q:**  Yes, they were. There was the Tsadora Thubden Sangpo [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར་བ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཟང་པོ] and Chamba Ngawang [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ངག་དབང].   

**A:**  Wasn't Tsering la [there]?   

**Q:**  At first, they appointed Phünkang Jedrung la.   

**A:**  That's why he was demoted.   

**Q:**  I heard that they attended the Guomindang meetings. You did not know about this?   

**A:**  Are you referring to those <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> whom Künsangtse wrote about not going to the meeting?   

**Q:**  Yes. However, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> insists that they did attend the meeting, but Künsangtse says quite differently.   

**A:**  Künsangtse has not said that they did not attend the meeting.   

