# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0069.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
**Date of Interview:** 27 February 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས] was a monk official who was a staff member of Trapchi. In this interview, he discusses the Dalai Lama’s escape to Yadong and his own work in the Trapchi Office. He talks about how various Chinese officials were received, and of being a member of the investigation team, and the electricity project at Trapchi. He also talks about his trip to China, his work with Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen, and how Jayan Dawa, Alo Chöndze, and others came to India. Additionally, he describes the activities of Tibetans in Kalimpong, and the debates over whether or not the Dalai Lama should stay in India.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0069_06/H_0069_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Kungö, as I just spoke with you, in 1950, Chamdo was lost. After that, the Dalai Lama went to Yadong. So around this time, where were you?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa around the autumn of 1950, when the chaos in Chamdo began, right? Then in the 11th Tibetan month, it was kind of cold. When he went to Yadong, since I was an official of the Trapchi Leygung (office) and there were some important documents in the Trapchi Leygung, I also went to Yadong.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for you going to Yadong?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama sort of escaped from Lhasa, right? The Trapchi Leygung had a lot of important documents, so that was also packed with him. Tsarong Kungö Dzasa went as part of the retinue. The other head [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ] was Kungö Jawdang Ta Lama, the acting jigyab khembo or khentsab [Tib. མཁན་ཚབ]; he was also with the retinue. So I had to leave in quite a hurry. When I reached Yadong, I was sent to India along with Tsarong Kungö Rimshi. At that time, we were working on a large electricity project at Shangdab [Tib. གཞང་འདབས], which was part of the Trapchi Leygung. The one who did the work was Tsarong Kungö Rimshi, and then there was a tsendrön. The tsendrön stayed in Lhasa and though I was not working on the electricity project, I was part of the Trapchi Leygung. A large number of electrical parts were ordered and some of them were arriving. In Lhasa, the electricity project was built and it was extensive. For the time being, it was sort of thought that it would be better to not continue the project, in case there was chaos in the country and the work could not be done. So the two of us were sent and we stayed in Kalimpong for a while, and then went down to Calcutta since the General Electric Company (GEC) supplied the parts. The two of us came from Yadong. In Kalimpong, the trade representatives [Tib. ཚོང་དོན] were Lobsang Tsewang [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་དབང] and Surkhang Rimshi. The four of us were sent to talk with the GEC. We had a lot of discussions about what parts we should and could acquire. After that, in Yadong, there were daily discussions about the political situation. So we received the order from Yadong that we should not put a stop to the project and then return the parts since it would seem like we were just letting go of our country. The parts had been ordered and we should collect them. So we went down to Calcutta and said that we were going to collect what had been made and what was yet to be made. After this, in Beijing, the 17-Point Agreement was signed. From Lhasa, as an assistant to Ngabö was the ex-nendrön Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན] and Sambo. Ngabö must have written saying that he needed them. They were sent by the two Sitsabs. From Yadong, Künsangtse Dzasa and Trunyichemmo Lhaula [Lhautara] went. They were there for the 17-Point Agreement until around May, I think. After the Agreement, they returned and at that time, I was in Kalimpong. Along with them was Zhang Jingwu and four to five other Chinese.   

**Q:**  So when Zhang Jingwu and all were coming, you were at Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there not any organizations and associations, kyidu, in Kalimpong at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, there were.   

**Q:**  Tharchin Babu la was there, right? So were there any political associations, or kyidu, in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  The Chinese were just coming into Tibet, right? So the various associations and kyidu were not siding with the Chinese. They did go to greet them. We had no choice but to go, isn't that it?   

**Q:**  Even if there were not any associations favorable to the Chinese, maybe there were some who were against the Chinese.   

**A:**  No, not during this time. This was in 1951 and there were those who had come earlier and formed kyidu, like the Panja Kyidu. There was this kyidu and no others at that time.   

**Q:**  So there were not any that were against the Chinese?   

**A:**  No, and there also weren't any who were happy about the Chinese, either. It was as usual.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese representative come to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, he did, and most probably, the house that was rented for him was rented by the trade representative. He stayed for around four to five days. Tharchin Babu la was there, who was sort of knowledgeable about things. Do you remember the school?   

**Q:**  I heard it said that there was a school.   

**A:**  There was a school and at the school, there was a meeting. Some of the public had come and we had to go, right? So there were some people and some of us government officials. Then there were the Chinese, the dzasa, and the trunyichemmo who had come from China. That was the first time I attended the school. The school was there when the Guomindang were in power and since the power in China had changed hands. So, there were talks and lectures. The lectures were the usual things about the liberation in China, and that they had this and that and all the good things. At that time, what I remember is that Tharchin Babu La gave an interesting talk. He got up and said, "It has been two years since I've heard that there were going to be and that there were not going to be friendly relations [Tib. མཐུན་ལམ] between China and Tibet. Today, whatever it is, some kind of friendly relation seems to have taken place. So both sides have to do their best," and he used his hands in a circular motion and said that it was like the wheel of samsara [Tib. འཇིགས་རྟེན་སྲིད་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ], things would turn. Then he said, "Earlier, the portraits hanging on the walls were not like this," and he behaved like he didn't know the names. That, of course, was a lie. Then [someone] said, "Chairman Mao," and then he said, "Yes, Chairman Mao is there now and when the wheel of samsara turns, then it turns like that ." Then the Chinese, Dzasa Künsangtse, and Trunyichemmo Lhaula [Lhautara] went to Yadong and met the Dalai Lama. Then after some time, it seems that it was decided to return to Lhasa. I received an order saying that I should leave things to Tsarong Rimshi and that I should return.   

**Q:**  So you returned to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you got there—now, from Yadong, Zhang Jingwu went ahead. Somehow, many say that. Was there some reason why he should have gone ahead and the Dalai Lama was to follow later?   

**A:**  I doubt if there was any. Zhang Jingwu, the interpreter, Alo Buzhang and a few of them—not many were there, and so they went ahead. What talk was there about going ahead and following, I don't know. And there, the two sitsabs would do the receiving, right?   

**Q:**  Zhang Jingwu was the representative of China, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was said to have been a big one.   

**Q:**  So how was the reception done? Did a reception group and government officials have to go?   

**A:**  I don't think this took place. When they first met, the representative was a big one from China, and it seems that a welcome befitting a big representative was not quite satisfactory. The two sitsabs would not even do it. {Note: There was a big reception delegation, although the Sitsab were not part of it. See M. C. Goldstein, 2007. A History of Modern Tibet, Volume 2: 169-179 for a discussion of this.]   

**Q:**  At that time, was there a problem?   

**A:**  About not being satisfied with the reception?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I don't think so. There were no talks like that. Later, what I heard was that the Chinese were not satisfied with the reception.   

**Q:**  So now the Dalai Lama had come from Yadong to Lhasa. Were there any talks about the 17-Point Agreement after that? Ngabö had to come from Chamdo, right? What I heard was that the Tsondu (Assembly) was summoned and Ngabö spoke for many hours and said that there was no alternative to that Agreement.   

**A:**  I don't think that was during this time. When the Dalai Lama returned from Yadong, there were some Chinese officers and staff [Tib. ངོ་ལས] living in Trimön's old house. There were no [PLA] soldiers in the country. Then after a few months, many soldiers came. Ngabö was also with them. Among those we knew, there was Baba Phünwang la in the first group of soldiers. Before they arrived in Lhasa, near Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] House, it was all empty space. They arrived marching in formation. Even in Lhasa, there were groups of soldiers posted—the Chinese would expect danger, right? The main reception was at Taring and we were there. Then the soldiers went through the town and their accommodations [Tib. སྡོད་སྒྲིག] were at the Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] field. So en route, they left soldiers at various points and proceeded.   

**Q:**  So this was when Ngabö came?   

**A:**  Yes, the day he arrived.   

**Q:**  So there was a reception?   

**A:**  There was the Kashag reception. Ngabö came in his traveling Tibetan uniform [Tib. ཕྱོགས་ཆས] and arrived separately along with his servants and retinue.   

**Q:**  During this time, a lot of Chinese arrived and the price of food increased, and the People's Association began. When was this happening?   

**A:**  The 17-Point Agreement was implemented in 1951. It was right after the two sitsabs resigned [Note: on 27 April 1952]. The People's Association had handed in a six point petition.   

**Q:**  So we are talking about the first People's Association, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the first. Jayan Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ] was in it. He later came to Kalimpong and died there. He was a Loseling monk. Another was an ex-chandzö of Sera Mey called Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས]. Another was a Sera Mey clerk called Lotrin [Tib. བློ་ཕྲིན]. Then there was a leather worker [Tib. དངོ་བཟོ] who was connected with Taktra Labrang. Then in Tölung and in the nearby areas of Lhasa, it seemed that when they met, there were about 60 to 100 people. But on the Chinese name list, there were only about six to seven people. So based on this, an investigation [Tib. བཀའ་ཞིབ] was sort of done. I was there.   

**Q:**  When the investigation was done?   

**A:**  Yes. Among those doing the investigation was Sambo Dzasa, Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] Khenjung. It was said that Ngabö was coming, but he did not. Then, Tsögo Sey Kusho [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ་སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས] and I were sort of letter writers [Tib. ཡིག་འདྲི]. On the east side of the Tsuglagang, above the Tsikhang, the investigation was done. On the Chinese side was the director, Lin Lai [Ch. zhu ren]. He was the main one. There were one or two people under him and there were some armed soldiers. When we met and discussed who should be asked to appear, the Chinese had a list. So they were asked to appear. At first, Jayan Dawa was asked to come. He was a calm person and not nervous. He made an appropriate reply. When the questions were asked, we did not reply in our Tibetan fashion. The Chinese had something written. For example: who first brought you here, who was there when you went, if you had to affix seals, then who was the one who wrote it [Tib. སྒྲོག་སྦྱང] and who affixed their seals, and who was there—so things like that. Jayan Dawa gave appropriate replies. The Chinese sort of accepted his replies. Then whatever Jayan Dawa said—his companions were just outside, right? The questions were the same. So it seems that they were having some discussions below. Then when the others were brought in, the answers were similar. Anyway, it was left at a mediocre level [Tib. སྤམ་པོ].   

**Q:**  So they were questioned separately?   

**A:**  Yes, one by one. However, the rest knew what the others had said before. They were not being that strict [Tib. དམ་དྲག་ཆེན་པོ] about it. The articles were all concerned with what Tibet needed, right? After the Chinese came, commodities became scarce and the people suffered. Another said that the two sitsabs had to be reinstated. Another concerned the money from wool trade during the Iron-Tiger and Iron-Mouse years. It seemed that the wool trade kind of incurred a loss. So all the things we needed in Tibet were said. Now, the Chinese needed to destroy this organization, right? So they said that it was not lawful [Tib. ལུགས་མཐུན་མ་རེད].   

**Q:**  When the investigation was done, what I heard was that they [People's representatives] approached the Kashag and then the old Sandutsang [house].   

**A:**  It happened in that way.   

**Q:**  It's said that they went to the Kashag and then to the Sandutsang house.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. That's correct. What I was saying—now—there were a lot of people in Lhasa who had met. People from Lhasa and many from the various villages. They met many times. So how did they get a hold of the people who were summoned? The ringleaders who were recognized? This was done when they went to make the petition to the Kashag. A note was made of the people who came to make the petition. Naturally, they would do that, right? After that, they went to inquire about the matter. When they did, some of the same people from earlier were there, but some new ones were there too. A copy of the petition was made at the old Sandutsang house, where the Chinese [leaders] were staying, right? So they went to give the petition to them there. At that time, the Chinese would also have made a note of the people who came, right? They took photos and made a report. Later, that was the basis on which, from among so many people, certain individuals were called. No one else, just those who came to make the petition were questioned.   

**Q:**  Where were you during all of this? Were you writing?   

**A:**  Tsögo Kadrung and I were writing letters and we were there with the rest. The way they questioned—they said that they wanted to ask such and such, and so there was an interpreter. They were asking through our Tibetan leaders.   

**Q:**  Among the Chinese, who was there?   

**A:**  The main person was Lin Lai, he was called Lin Zhuren or something. He had a mellow [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] character. Not someone who was ready to burst into anger. There was also an interpreter.   

**Q:**  And from our government's side?   

**A:**  There were four: Sambo, Trendong, Tsögo, and myself.   

**Q:**  Now, there were no petitions made at this time, right?   

**A:**  What?   

**Q:**  Were they asked to come to such and such a place?   

**A:**  Yes, in Lhasa it was very easy. The government sent a messenger saying come here, and they would come.   

**Q:**  Where was the investigation done?   

**A:**  On the east side of the Tsuglagang. Above the Tsikhang, there was a room.   

**Q:**  So they all went there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And together, the Chinese soldiers were there too?   

**A:**  Yes, it was said that there was this and that, but whether it was his bodyguard or not, there was at least one soldier with a gun. Others were not apparent. Now, this is what I heard. The six or so were being investigated and the majority were outside, like on the circumambulation road around the Tsuglagang and other areas, and it is said that others [supporters] were waiting in case something bad happened to the six or so.   

**Q:**  What? I didn't quite catch that. Who did you say was waiting outside?   

**A:**  If something bad happened to them, then there were their supporters. There were others in their organization, right? The offices were upstairs [in the Tsuglagang], but below there were places of worship and places for circumambulating. So it is said that they were prepared.   

**Q:**  So after the investigation, something had to be said, right? That it was alright or it was not alright, that "The way you guys acted is not correct," et cetera.   

**A:**  It's as I have already said. It was said that the organization was not something that was in accordance with the customs [Tib. ལུགས་སྲོལ་དང་མ་མཐུན་པ]. In Tibet, starting the organization and registering [members], there were no such custom. Earlier, since there were no situations where everyone was clamoring, there was no need for such organizations. And so they said that this was not in accordance with custom. So they took the papers and burnt them, and said that "From now on, you cannot do such things." So advice was sort of given and things were left at that.   

**Q:**  Some say that there were organization members [Tib. ཚོགས་མི] from all over.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. There were.   

**Q:**  Even from the various dzongs?   

**A:**  There were.   

**Q:**  How widespread was it?   

**A:**  The people gathered in Lhasa. I don't know whether they came from distant districts, but from around Lhasa, there must have been about 160-170 people whose names were listed.   

**Q:**  Only the named ones?   

**A:**  I think there were about that many. At that time, certain people were asked. There was this person from Tölung. He said, "Who asked you to join this organization? Who recruited you?" He replied, "Mao Zedong has sent the army into Tibet and the price of food has increased two to three times, and there are a lot of difficulties in the country. I am a householder from nearby Lhasa and whenever I come to Lhasa and whoever I meet, all they ever talk about is how scarce items are and how expensive they are. There is the 17-Point Agreement and when one looks in that, it seems that the people have a right to say things, to voice their concern and difficulties. So we all have to do something so that we don't die from starvation. I went to search for this organization and since I was a villager, when I came to Lhasa, I heard that some people were meeting near Kündeling in Jaralingka [Tib. སྦྱར་རག་གླིང་ག]. I went there, but the meeting was over and I could not get there in time. So I pursued the matter and made inquiries. One day, I heard that they were meeting at the Shide [monastery], and so I went there." Jayan Dawa was staying at Shide. So he said that he went to search for the organization and nobody asked him to join. They were all answering like that, saying, "In our country, we have to express our concerns so we don't die from starvation. Even in the 17-Point Agreement, it looks like there is a place for people to voice their thoughts, and so I said it."   

**Q:**  Now, in Lhasa there were a lot of associations, kyidu, of the artisans, et cetera. Were they also in the organization?   

**A:**  At that time, it was not possible to say. The time period was short.   

**Q:**  Now, even if the people were not in the organizaation, was there strong support for it?   

**A:**  Yes. There must have been. Earlier, in Lhasa, there was no such thing as the People's Association. As soon as that started, since the Chinese were always alert to what the Tibetan people might do, they took notice. They were extremely scared [Tib. རྐུབ་ཚག་ཤོར]. As far as the Association is concerned, it seemed that it had just started. So they heard about it and complained to the Kashag, and so the investigation was done and they took steps so that the Association could not meet anymore. So the time period was very short.   

**Q:**  I was going to say something, but now it just slipped my mind. Oh, yes! During this time, some say that Chinese considered it a dangerous period and that they made bunkers?   

**A:**  The Chinese were rather alarmists and were always startled. If something was done, maybe that was it.   

**Q:**  It was said that shops were closed and that they went into the residence of Zhang Jingwu, it's said as if quite a thing happened.   

**A:**  At that time, this did not happen. It was as I have relayed—that the organization was not correct. That it was not in accordance with custom. That's all that was said—just some kind of advice. This was given by the Chinese. Nothing was really said. So that's all they were saying to the Chinese, right? But they were telling the Tibetan government that they had to get rid of this. That this was against custom. That "You have to get guarantees from them." That "From now on, no organizations are permitted." So this they had to say to the Tibetan government, right? So that's what happened.   

**Q:**  I heard that it was also at this time that people were not permitted to go for circumambulation around Lhasa on the Lingkor [Tib. གླིང་སྐོར], from some time in the evening until morning. I also heard that people who went into the residences of Zhang Jingwu and Ngabö were fired upon. Have you heard this?   

**A:**  No, I have not.   

**Q:**  Well, some were saying these things.   

**A:**  At that time, the People's Association did do something that was never done before, right? They started an organiozation and conveyed their concerns and difficulties. This way the people could see what the Chinese were doing and the people did not like that the Chinese were coming to Tibet. Even though this organization was done away with, the time had already come that everybody was thinking about politics. Later, I wonder how things turned out.   

**Q:**  Some say that the two sitsabs had contacts with the organization, that they were leaders of the organization.   

**A:**  This is a Chinese talk. This is what they were telling the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  So were the two sitsabs actually in the organization?   

**A:**  No, there was nothing like this in any documents. No, there isn't. It is just talk. It is possible that they were involved. But this cannot be proven. If it could, then the Chinese would not keep quite at all.   

**Q:**  So nothing is certain. Some say they were. Others say they might have been.   

**A:**  Everybody was saying this. Even if we accepted that they were, the Chinese had no proof. If they did, then they would have found a basis to do worse than what they did. So it seems they had no proof.   

**Q:**  So at this time, was the talk in Lhasa that the two sitsabs were in with the People's Association or what?   

**A:**  The People's Association liked the two sitsabs very much. They absolutely relied on them.   

**Q:**  Was there any talk that the two sitsabs and the People's Association were secretly meeting and things like that?   

**A:**  There were rumors of that, but it was not something that people listened to with any importance. So it was probably something that was said by the Chinese to us.   

**Q:**  Where were you during this time? In Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  At the Shangdab electricity project?   

**A:**  At Trapchi itself. I didn't have to work at the Shangdab site.   

**Q:**  This electricity project, when did it begin? Were you to set up a new one?   

**A:**  Our electricity at Trapchi came from Dogde [Tib. དོག་བདེ]. Changöba was working on that. Earlier [during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama) he went to England, right? There was a small hydroelectric power station which supplied all of Trapchi and it was even able to provide electricity to Lhasa. Later, it was not looked after well and it was deteriorating daily. It was sufficient for Trapchi, but not for Lhasa. And so later, the government—well, they also needed electricity for government work and factories. So there was a need for electricity and they thought about establishing a larger electricity project. In Calcutta there was Mr. Reed who was, I think, the head of the GEC. I heard he's still there. He was called and he came to Lhasa to do an inspection. Since the main power was to be water, Shangdab was selected. A power station was built and the canals were dug. The canals were made very well. The person who made the plans was Aufschnaiter. He was employed by us and paid a salary. The people in charge were Tsarong Rimshi and a tsendrön. They stayed there and built a nice house/building since a place was needed for the office. Sometimes, the whole office used to go and tour. I went and the house was very good. Since the canals were planned by Aufschnaiter, they were excellent. One could just take a walk by the canal. The items had to be brought from India. Later, after 1959, it was one of the main places where the Chinese sent people for hard labor. I think the Chinese completed it, maybe.   

**Q:**  When was the hydroelectric project started?   

**A:**  You mean the planning?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  It began around 1947-48.   

**Q:**  So there was no connection with the coming of the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, it was about to go to pieces. There were no suspicions at that time.   

**Q:**  There were a lot of plans for reform in the Legjö Leygung (Reform Office). When was that?   

**A:**  That was around 1947, maybe. That was there until the end, and there were changes made to the income of the government.   

**Q:**  There were a number of articles in the 17-Point Agreement and as I see it, the government thought that it was probably best to try and work within the terms of the 17-Point Agreement. The Chinese were also on good behavior at that time, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a whole different face to show. When they first came, they needed food for their soldiers. They came without anything and so they were eating from our country. They had no alternative except to request help from the Tibetan government, right? So whatever needed to be done, the Chinese used to go to the Kashag and make requests. They would say, "Give us [this] and loan us [that]," and so there was no choice. Then when more and more soldiers came and they got stronger, then they would ask the Kashag to come to them and then start giving orders. So their "power of suppression [Tib. བཙན་ཤུགས]" became much stronger and their face (attitude) was no longer the same. Then they got stronger and stronger—and as the road construction progressed, they were more consolidated. I doubt, then, that there was any reference to the 17-Point Agreement, only what they wanted to do.   

**Q:**  So it stayed that way in 1951-54, right? The people [question not finished]   

**A:**  In 1952, I went to China. It seems that it had been some time since the Chinese first said that they wanted to send people to see the great developments in China. It seemed that the government did not make a move right away. They postponed for a while. Later, they insisted and since they were asking all the time, the government had to send people. There were about 18-19 officials. Our leader was Kungö Liushar.   

**Q:**  This was in '52, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It was the first one, wasn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, it was the very first one. We went via Kham. We had to ride for three to four days past Chamdo. There were no motorable roads. Then we went by vehicles. So it was a tour, and if I were to tell you in brief, we just had to tour all over, to schools and factories and all over. Every day we had to go quite a few times, and it was not easy. When we got to a factory, the leader would give a lecture about how bad things were at the time of the Guomindang and how now, after the Communist Revolution, things had improved and production had increased such and such. Things like that. It seemed that they needed us to say when we returned that under the Guomindang things were bad and now they were good. So if I were to tell you in short, that was it. They said that they had such and such, and—we didn't know what they had or did not have, right? So it seems that they needed a dissemination of information when we returned to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Later, what Kungö Liushar said, the Chinese published it.   

**A:**  You mean all the praise that he gave?   

**Q:**  Yes. [laughter]   

**A:**  Well, he had no choice but to praise them. After one had toured three to four places, then there would be a meeting. They would ask, "Now, you have seen the various places, so what did you think?" We would say what we were told previously, right? We would say, "It seems that the previously things were not that good, but now the production figures are so good, and such and such is so good." So we just had to say that. So what we said, that was done through Liushar, and they said that we said it. And so that's how the praise was given, and that was their policy anyway.   

**Q:**  There were some, or rather, many, who may not have seen anything the outside of Tibet and such development like what was in China.   

**A:**  There were many.   

**Q:**  So these people, when they first saw these things, they would have seen something good, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they would be astounded, right? However, you know, Tibetans are very strange and they do not become astonished even if they think it. Anyway, the people who toured China and said that China was good—that Liushar said such and such—this is how it took place. They were the ones who told us that "In the old days, there weren't such things, and now these things have been made." That previously, there was nothing. Now a factory had been built. They were the ones who told us that. Otherwise, we never would have known. So the praise that they gave, we had to say it. So it seems that that was the intention.   

**Q:**  They said that the 17-Point Agreement should be signed, otherwise, they would forcefully liberate. There seemed to be no alternative except to work within the terms of the Agreement. There were many articles that they were coming up, that they had to be assisted, et cetera. So during this period, 1951-54, what were the officials and the people thinking? At this time, the Chinese were also showing their good side. So did some think that all of this was going to last? What did they think?   

**A:**  I don't know what the others were thinking, but I was in Lhasa until 1954. From 1954, I was in India. So the way that I was thinking, I felt that things were going to gradually erode [Tib. ཡལ་དུ་བཅུག]. I did not think that together something would have come out of it because we had our own way of doing things. To tell you clearly, they did not come all the way to help us. They came for themselves, for their own purposes. So every day, the power of the Tibetan government was slipping and it was obvious that things were going to proceed along the lines that they decided. I don't remember thinking that there was the 17-Point Agreement and that if the various nicec sounding [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ་མོ] articles were implemented, then it would be good.   

**Q:**  The reason was that they were saying sweet things, and from our side, we did not have the power/means [Tib. ནུས་པ] at all. Even at this time, they were saying that everything would be as it was and that there was religious freedom, et cetera. So since they were saying such things, and since we did not have the means, I was wondering if such thoughts existed.   

**A:**  I don't think so. It would seem that that was not a possibility. Daily, we could witness—there were a lot of Chinese, and our customs and everything were different.   

**Q:**  At this time, why did we dislike the Chinese? What were they doing?   

**A:**  They wanted places to stay, and they were telling of their difficulties and what had to be procured, so it had to be done from this country, right? And so what they were saying was that China would assist Tibet. If one thought about it in general, then it was a possibility that they could help us, since they were bigger than us. But that was not the case. When they came up, they just became more and more powerful [Tib. དབང་ཤུགས] and did what they wanted. It seems that their main task was to make the Tibetan government fade away. So, I'm sure everyone knew about this.   

**Q:**  I wonder if you have heard this. During this time, since the Chinese were pressuring Tibet, the Kashag was having difficulty. So they were facing hardships and they did not have the clout. So sort of on the side, Drönyerchemmo Phala and a few others formed an organization under a pledge. Namseling, Depön Tashi Bera la, and Tseja Gyentsen la were probably there. A few of them were said to be making connections with Kalimpong where Jenkhentsisum was. So was this something that people knew at that time? What have you heard regarding this?   

**A:**  That was in 1954, right?   

**Q:**  It could have been, but I never figured out when they formed the organization.   

**A:**  Kungö Chemmo and I had the occasion to speak about such things. Everybody was fully relying on him, right? He took on tremendous responsibility. I don't think it was a case where they formed an organization [Tib. ཚོགས་པ]. Anyway, this Chemmo [Phala] thing is something that should not be known by all, right? So with more reliable people, even if he did not reveal the plan, he could have asked the person to do something for him—and there were some who would did really good work. In such situations, Kungö Gyentsen la and that type were really excellent. So in this way, I think he was relying on them, but I don't think it was a situation where he said, "Okay, we are an organization." I don't think this was the case.   

**Q:**  So then about five or six of them did not get together and make a pledge?   

**A:**  That I did not hear, and there were some I was close to. But to these very people, Chemmo would rely on them to do some work. So I don't think it was a situation where they said, "Okay, we are an organizatiob, and this is our first plan and this is the next," but I don't really know. But in Kalimpong, Jenkhentsisum was petitioning the Indian government and trying to do something. However, in Tibet, they needed to do it with somebody who could make the Dalai Lama know these things. This was probably done through Chemmo.   

**Q:**  So this Kalimpong thing was not totally separate, but they needed to consult with Chemmo, right?   

**A:**  Whatever they were doing, it seems that they were in touch with Chemmo.   

**Q:**  What was the reason that Kungö Chemmo had to resort to this? Some say that the Kashag was having great difficulty and they had no clout. Others say that the Kashag could not even meet because the moment they met, the Chinese knew about it. So what was the situation?   

**A:**  Probably, that must have been true.   

**Q:**  What was true?   

**A:**  Anyway, whether it was a situation where the internal matters of the Kashag were immediately heard by the Chinese or whether the talk between Chemmo and the Kashag was inconvenient, it was a situation where I was not there. However, if one were to see it honestly, I think both sides didn't dare discuss things in case the Chinese would know about it. The Chinese liked spying and Chemmo and the Kashag were dealing with important matters. So even if one thought, "Oh, this person is trustworthy. He won't do such things," I think it was a case where they didn't dare mention things. Anyway, the blame was on the Kashag, as if the Kashag was up to something. However, later, all the members of the Kashag were in exile. They did not go over to the Chinese, really. Until then [1959], when something like that happened to the country, there wouldn't have been any well-being or happiness, right? And so people probably started blaming people and saying, "Oh, he did it and they did it," et cetera.   

**Q:**  Weren't the connections with Kalimpong and the work of the Drönyerchemmo (Phala) something that the Kashag should and would have known about?   

**A:**  They must have known about it. In reality, it had to be one and could not be two, right? But there are always different circumstances. So it seems to have been very, very difficult. Anyway, I was in India. It must have been very difficult.   

**Q:**  You went down to China in 1952 and then?   

**A:**  I returned in 1953 via Hong Kong. I stayed there for six to seven months and then returned.   

**Q:**  So when you returned, was the situation as before?   

**A:**  You mean in Lhasa?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Yes, it was as before. Nothing much had happened, however, a lot of soldiers had arrived and there were loud speakers and songs playing everywhere. There was no such thing earlier in Lhasa, right? So in this way, there was degradation. Anyway, there was nothing grave.   

**Q:**  So you stayed for about six months?   

**A:**  About six to seven months.   

**Q:**  Oh! There was another People's Association, wasn't there? The one with Alo Chöndze and all.   

**A:**  This was after I returned. It was around 1954.   

**Q:**  In 1954, you went for work to India.   

**A:**  Yes, for the Trade Mission [Tib. ཚོང་དོན]. Khenjung and I were together.   

**Q:**  Trekhang Khenjung?   

**A:**  No, Lobsang Gyentsen, one of the Jenkhentsisum.   

**Q:**  When did the Jenkhentsisum begin?   

**A:**  It was after Khenjung arrived.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  1954.   

**Q:**  In 1954. So there were no organizations in Kalimpong before that?   

**A:**  I don't think so.   

**Q:**  Because earlier, in 1952, there was the first People's Association and some say that they had connections with Kalimpong. And so if they began the organization in 1954, then that organization was not connected.   

**A:**  Khenjung and I came some time in March, and so it started then and not earlier. However, as I mentioned earlier, the people's representatives, like Jayan Dawa, were at Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  They had come to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, not all, but Jayan Dawa was there.   

**Q:**  Did they come for their own work or was it for the association? The association was finished, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was disbanded, but it is said that he came for—it is usually said that when he was at the monastery, he was doing some trading. However, he was in Kalimpong. He was the person the Chinese were most suspicious of. Later, he was not a strong member of the Kalimpong organization. He was quite elderly and must have died.   

**Q:**  So he just stayed in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So he did not have any work in the organization?   

**A:**  He did. In 1954, the organization work in Kalimpong was picking up, right? He was in it. And from Lhasa Alo Chöndze came, and then there was a Ganden representative, then Shelkar [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར] Chandzö. In Lhasa, there was this thing where during the Mönlam, they went and distributed leaflets, right? One or two of their people were arrested by the Chinese and they died in prison. So some of these people came to India and stayed until the end. Shelkar Chandzö la was kind of a cock-eyed person, and I think he died in Dharamsala. Alo Chöndze was another.   

**Q:**  In Kalimpong, whether it was Jenkhentsisum or some other organization, what was there in Kalimpong? Were there some kyidu?   

**A:**  There was the Panja Kyidu from the start.   

**Q:**  What kyidu?   

**A:**  Panja.   

**Q:**  What is panja?   

**A:**  Panja means—Since they were all Tibetans, they were not permitted to give some other name. It seems that this began a long time ago. The Tibetans who were in Kalimpong were traders who couldn't manage, parents and children who did not get along, and patrons and servants who did not get along, so there were a lot of runaways. For these people, even if they died, they needed someone to get rid of the body. So it is said that a kyidu was formed. When they formed, they had to act according to Indian law, right? And so they formed a panchayat. So, in India, it was the five people. The five were chosen by the community and they made the decisions. In India, this is nationwide, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  It is said to have be very beneficial. There was no need to go to the police or the court, and so they would meet and since the arguments were within this organization—even if it concerned a landowner who was speaking, the truth could be clearly settled, since everyone knew each other. So there was no need to hire a lawyer, and in India, this is very important.   

**Q:**  So they started a panchayat.   

**A:**  They used that name.   

**Q:**  So, who was in it?   

**A:**  So it seems that all the Tibetans in Kalimpong were in this panchayat. Internally, they had the kyidu, like the Packers Kyidu and the Kayen (Marwari) Kyidu, according to work. So they were all a part of the panchayat. Later, this broke off into two. There was a new kyidu formed called Yidön Kyidu.   

**Q:**  Who were the workers in this kyidu?   

**A:**  Just the people.   

**Q:**  What were they doing regarding Tibetan politics?   

**A:**  They were not doing anything at first. Later, Jenkhentsisum was doing some work, right? And they needed some workers, right? So they were there in this.   

**Q:**  That's quite a lot of people.   

**A:**  All the Tibetans who were there were sort of a part of it. However, it was not so clear cut, like they came up and asked, "Shall I do this or that?"   

**Q:**  What I heard regarding Jenkhentsisum was that Kungö Khenjung made all the connections in Tibet. Shakabpa with the Indian government and Kungö Gyalo la made all the connections with the outside, whether it was with the Americans or whoever. Some say this.   

**A:**  This must be correct.   

**Q:**  So was Kungö Khenjung making connections with Tibet?   

**A:**  There was no other connection except to send letters and to receive them. So Khenjung was doing this. Yes, he did it.   

**Q:**  So since he had to have certain political connections, then, he was doing this through Phala Drönyerchemmo?   

**A:**  Yes, whatever they were doing in India, the Drönyerchemmo (Phala) was the one who was told about it.   

**Q:**  So when you were in Kalimpong, did you go to some meetings?   

**A:**  I did go.   

**Q:**  What were they about?   

**A:**  The people offered a golden throne, right? So they were regarding things like that, collecting contributions and sending them. Then there was a flood at Gyantse. We collected and sent money. There was a lot.   

**Q:**  Yes, around this time there was the Dedön Tsogpa.   

**A:**  Yes, it was the same organization.   

**Q:**  Just a different name or what?   

**A:**  No, that's it. There wasn't a name from the beginning. If you asked who was in the Dedön Tsogpa, then, Jenkhentsisum was in it. The name was just called Dedön Tsogpa.   

**Q:**  Now, one of the main objectives was to propagate the situation of Tibet to the outside, right?   

**A:**  It was as you have said earlier—with the Indian government and the outside. Like that.   

**Q:**  So how long did you stay in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Until 1959.   

**Q:**  From 1954?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Wow! That's a long time. And then you did not return?   

**A:**  No, I did not. The Dalai Lama came in 1956 for the Buddha Jayanti.   

**Q:**  So did you take leave or what?   

**A:**  No, there were a lot of parts for the hydroelectric project. Do you know Deorali?   

**Q:**  Yes, Deorali.   

**A:**  They were left in Deorali. The ones who were staying there, like Tsarong Kungö Rimshi, Tangme la, Taring George la and others, they were asked to return and to hand over the work to the Trade Mission. Such an order arrived. So this was taken over by the Trade Mission, right? Gradually, then the Trade Mission was taken over by the Chinese and items were left over. And so from Lhasa, there was Taring Kungö Rimshi and Kungö Jedeyla [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ལགས] (a lay official), and from Kalimpong, myself—we were told to send the items. And so we spent time doing that. Then when the Dalai Lama arrived for the Buddha Jayanti, there were 15 large diesel trucks bought in Jangsebshar by the government. So [I] received these, and once we did that, then it was endless. Parts had to be sent. Then we had to ship the gasoline. So I was stuck doing this. In Yadong, Ngawang Rigdro la [Tib. ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ་ལགས] and Rinchen la [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་ལགས] were taking stock of the shipments. This was being used to transport the government grains, and I think they were also hiring out. So some income was coming in. Then, we had vehicles given by the Chinese, the ones that we had previously, as well as others presented by the people—so there were a few vehicles. For these, the Sikkim Political Officer in Gangtok used to supply the petrol permit. I used to receive that. So these were shipped and between here and Yadong there was Rinchenla, Ngawang Rigdro la and myself. [See their interviews too.]   

**Q:**  Yes, it was called the Transportation Office [Tib. འགྲིམ་འགྲུལ་ལས་ཁུངས]. Wasn't there a new one started?   

**A:**  I only know that the two were heading the trucks.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the trucks? Since there were roads, was it to do things faster and easier?   

**A:**  Well, there were roads, right? And there were a lot of shipments of government grains here and there. So at that time, it could be sent straight from Yadong, right? And I think it also went to the north, to Nagchu.   

**Q:**  In that case, then, the transportation corvée from one station to another was not used.   

**A:**  So these were not required, right? And around that time, there were a lot of private vehicles. Many jeeps were bought and taken over.   

**Q:**  Earlier, there was the transportation corvée from one place to another, right? So in the '50s, was that still intact or had it deteriorated?   

**A:**  It had been greatly reduced. The government, it seems, was not using it. For example, when we went down to China, we were entitled to transportation [Tib. ལམ་ཡིག], but we were given money to pay for the transportation. The rate was high and it cost us a lot.   

**Q:**  This was when you were going down to China, right? Via the northern route?   

**A:**  Yes, and from Trapchi Leygung, it cost a lot. It was costly because the rate that was given to the misers was fixed at a high level. Previously, there weren't such things, right?   

**Q:**  So after 1952, they were already thinking about this, right? The Legjö—and so the misers would not experience hardships.   

**A:**  Yes, that's for sure. Even for us it cost a lot.   

**Q:**  Regarding the transportation duties, did Shigatse say that they were not going to transport in the traditional way? After the Panchen Lama arrived, there were some problems, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were a lot of problems, that they weren't going to do the taxes. Anyway, I really don't have any specific things to say about that because I was on this side, in India. But that problem was always there because, from the beginning, they were eager to say it.   

**Q:**  Since you were in India, then, let me ask you about this. In 1956, the Dalai Lama came for the Buddha Jayanti, right? So how did that work? Did all of the residents of Kalimpong go to receive him?   

**A:**  They went up to Nathula [Tib. རྣ་ཐོས་ལ] and there were various reception stops at Gangtok, a little passed Teesta, in Tarkhola, a small town, and so on. However, the Dalai Lama was not able to rest as we had planned because from the time he arrived in Gangtok—he had to be in Delhi the following day at a certain time. We had various reception tents and he was only able to stop for a little while. He had to be in Bagdogra at a very early hour. So since he was leaving from Gangtok, that would take a few hours, right?   

**Q:**  So did you go to Delhi?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama arrived, you went to Nathula and then you went down to Bagdogra?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama went straight [there] and we did not. The Indian Army was there and the reception was done very well—and the Maharaj Kumar of Sikkim [Tib. འབྲས་ལྗོངས་རྒྱལ་སྲས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] provided the cars.   

**Q:**  Then where did you go?   

**A:**  I went to Delhi. And the pilgrimage had already begun.   

**Q:**  How did you get to Delhi?   

**A:**  Now, the retinue would go with the Dalai Lama, right? And those who were coming from Kalimpong would go on their own.   

**Q:**  Did you go in a train?   

**A:**  I went in a plane. I went to Calcutta and then waited a few hours and went to Delhi. I couldn't get a direct flight but there was one that went via Nagpur or something. I went in that.   

**Q:**  At this time, those who were staying in Kalimpong and the Jenkhentsisum were saying that it was a good opportunity for the Dalai Lama to stay, right? So who was in this and who was on the other side that was saying that the Dalai Lama should return? What was the situation?   

**A:**  It seems this way. Those who were here had asked the Dalai Lama to stay, right? So the whole Kashag from there [Lhasa] was here, right? And so they were asking, "What confidence do you have if you stay behind?"   

**Q:**  So was the Kashag united in this? How was it? Ngabö was there. Was Surkhang there?   

**A:**  Yes. Ragashag.   

**Q:**  Was it just three kalön?   

**A:**  I think so.   

**Q:**  What was on the minds of Surkhang and Ragashag? Were they saying that the Dalai Lama should return?   

**A:**  They must have been. I don't know what they were thinking. But regarding this, there were many discussions. Finally, Pandit Nehru was also consulted and many things were done. All of this is in the Dalai Lama's biography and it's very clear. Finally, the Dalai Lama could have stayed in Gangtok for a month—he did stay for 15-20 days. Even then it seemed that it was uncertain.   

**Q:**  Even when he was in Gangtok?   

**A:**  Yes. He had come to Gangtok and it was finally considered more favorable to return.   

**Q:**  So did all of this talk start from the very time the Dalai Lama arrived in Sikkim?   

**A:**  I think he was petitioned when he arrived in Delhi.   

**Q:**  So the main people who were asking him to stay were Jenkhentsisum and [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Yabshi?   

**A:**  And representatives like Alo Chöndze, Shelkar Chandzö la, and those who were staying in India—and so we were also sort of part of it.   

**Q:**  During this time, did you discuss at any meetings whether the Dalai Lama should stay?   

**A:**  I was among those who said that we should petition the Dalai Lama to stay. When the petition was made, I was not there. Since a petition was made, then it became a situation where the two sides had to consider, right? So this took a long time and it is clearly explained in the Dalai Lama's book.   

**Q:**  So when you went to the meetings, where did it take place and who was in it?   

**A:**  In Kalimpong, like at Khenjung's house.   

**Q:**  This was before the Dalai Lama arrived, right?   

**A:**  It was when we were just having some short meetings regarding the Gyantse flood. In Delhi, everyone was sort of separated and Jenkhentsisum was doing most of the work.   

**Q:**  So there were no meetings in Delhi?   

**A:**  There were no meetings where a lot of people were called. Now, I don't know if there were some that I did not know [about]. The actual petition had already been made, right? After that, the Dalai Lama was going to various places and they went to inquire. Finally, the Dalai Lama returned. So rather than any of us saying these things, it is very well explained in the Dalai Lama's book. It seemed that Pandit Nehru was also saying that the Dalai Lama should return.   

**Q:**  How long did the Dalai Lama stay in India?   

**A:**  I think he arrived sometime in November or December and returned maybe in May. But maybe that's too long. I can't tell you for sure.   

**Q:**  There was something about snowfall in Nathula. Does it snow in May?   

**A:**  That's why I said that I might have given a longer time period. Maybe it was March.   

**Q:**  So if things were not certain in Gangtok, then there must have been a lot of discussions in four months.   

**A:**  Yes, there must have been. In the meantime, from China, came Zhou Enlai. He met the Dalai Lama and the Kashag. Pandit Nehru was very friendly with him at that time. Even on buses in Delhi it was written, "India and China are brothers," "Hindu-China Bhai Bhai." It was really something then.   

**Q:**  I don't remember now who I asked, but in Kalimpong, there were some Khambas who were said to be associated with Andru Jinda. Anyway, there seemed to be many Khamba traders at that time. They were to go somewhere to the Sharsingma or Yadong area and they were to start a fight because if there was war, then the Dalai Lama would not have been able to return, right? So from Shriram, they bought clothes, or mugs, or spades, or something like that, and there were about 100 or so who decided that they were going to create some commotion. Then after some time, it was said that there was no need to go. So at that time, were there talks like that?   

**A:**  I think I heard them, now that I think about it. But I don't have the recollection that such and such people were involved. I have definitely heard that though.   

**Q:**  Yes, something about going to Sharsingma and [response not finished]  

**A:**  It's definite.   

**Q:**  Then it was said that they didn't have to fight.   

**A:**  I have I think heard something like that, but I don't think there is anything to that. Such talk—when it is said that someone is going to do something new—does occur. So it is basically just nothing [Tib. ད་ག་ཟེ]. So it is not really believable talk. Something like that always happens.   

**Q:**  I was thinking that if some wanted the Dalai Lama to stay, and if one thinks about it, it must have been the work of the Jenkhentsisum, right? If some problems could have been created, like starting a war, then the Dalai Lama could would not return.   

**A:**  Since you mentioned it, now I remember. I think I have heard it. These things can't be remembered because these things took place in 1956-57. Let's assume that it took place. I was in India until 1984-85. So many different people have come and so one hears such talks. At that time, such talk was secret. So some people say that at that time, they did this and that. That they agreed to do this and that. Even people who went to assassinate some people say that they did go. At that particular time, one had to be very secretive. Now, after so many years, people talk as if it did not matter. So one would think that one would hear from such people. But I have not. Otherwise, there are all kinds of talks. In Rajpur, one hears a lot of talk. When they come for holidays—and there are also a lot of ex-soldiers. All the secret work that was done, they tell. For example, that they went to America to be trained and where the list was made. That they went to Darjeeling and did such and such thing. Most were sent somewhere from Jalpaiguri. Seems that they were flying to some Pakistan land. Today it becomes talk.   

**Q:**  Not only that, but today, Lhamo Tsering la is writing a book on relations with the U.S. and all.   

**A:**  Is that right?   

**Q:**  Yes, about three or four volumes.   

