# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0069.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 61  
**Date of Birth:** 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Shingsar Lobsang Gelek [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས] was a monk official ans a staff member of Trapchi. In this interview, he talks about how the Dalai Lama or Regent was notified about important matters. He describes in detail the differences among the ranks of the tsidrung (monk officials) and the lay officials, including their offices and how they were appointed. Additionally, he discusses the different ways to become a tsidrung, their shagtsang (monk households) and the Tse labdra school. He also discusses the differences between the various classes of tsidrung and the work he did printing currency in Trapchi. Finally, he talks about the power and the duty of the Jigyab khembo, and how he functions with the Yigtsang and the Kashag.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0069_04/H_0069_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  If it would have been a personal matter, they were not allowed to go in. If it was an important official matter, they would go together to see the Dalai Lama or the Regent.   

**Q:**  In America, people would go to an office and say that they wanted to see whoever it was, like the president. And they would ask him whether he was busy or not, and if he was not busy, they would let us see him. Was it possible to do that in Tibet when the people wanted to see the Dalai Lama or the Regent?   

**A:**  I never heard about people trying to do that.   

**Q:**  Did they have to send a letter saying that they would like to come?   

**A:**  They didn't need to send a letter, they just had to report it to the officials in the Gag.   

**Q:**  The nendrön would go to the regent directly, right?   

**A:**  Probably.   

**Q:**  If the drönyerchemmo would go to the Dalai Lama directly, how could it have been that everyone blamed Kujar for not reporting the illness of the Dalai Lama instead of blaming the drönyerchemmo, the jigyab khembo and the kalön. They would have known that the Dalai Lama was sick, right? Why was Kujar punished and those people didn't get punished?   

**A:**  Yes, they knew what happened. It is impossible that they didn't know that because they were in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  That was just an attack against Kujar, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Would everyone have known, or just the tsidrung—like did the drönyerchemmo and the jigyab khembo know about that? The Prime Minister [Tib. སྲིད་བློན] and the kalön probably didn't receive the message and they didn't know about that because they were not in Norbulinga, right?   

**A:**  For example, nowadays—someone wrote that the Dalai Lama didn't attend the Death Anniversary of Tsongkhapa, thevNgamjö. He might have said that he was sick.   

**Q:**  He might have just said that he was not going to attend the anniversary ceremony, and no one would have asked for the reason, right? Before the Dalai Lama attended the anniversary, would the people in Norbulinga, like the jigyab khembo, have known that he got a cold?   

**A:**  They probably would have known and there would have been a kalön on duty whose turn it was to stay in Norbulinga [Tib. བཞུགས་ཆ]. They would have known that.   

**Q:**  How would the kalön have known? Who would have told them because they were not in the Dalai Lama's room?   

**A:**  I don't think this was something to be kept secret. Why would they have kept it secret? They didn't think of keeping it secret.   

**Q:**  Later, Künphel la said that it was the Dalai Lama's order not to report it. Were there any other offices where only the tsidrung would attend?   

**A:**  There were the Laja and the Tseja.   

**Q:**  There were lay officials in those offices. I mean, were there offices where the tsidrung exclusively attended? I have some names of lower offices. What was next to the khenjung?   

**A:**  Next to the khenjung was the tsendrön.   

**Q:**  Were they equal to the fifth rank? I also know the treasury in the Potala, Tse Nyertsang Leygung [Tib. རྩེ་གཉེར་ཚང་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**A:**  Only the fifth rank tsidrung who were not tsendrön were there in that office.   

**Q:**  Were tsendrön higher than fifth rank officials?   

**A:**  Tsendrön were part of the fifth rank. There were a lot of other things within the fifth rank.   

**Q:**  Tsendrön was not a rank, right?   

**A:**  Right, it was a position.   

**Q:**  If you asked the tsidrung about their rank, would they say that "I am a fourth rank [official]," rimshi?   

**A:**  Rimshi was for the lay officials.   

**Q:**  Would the tsidrung say that they were fifth rank officials?   

**A:**  No, they wouldn't.   

**Q:**  What would they say?   

**A:**  They would say, "I am a tsendrön and a letsenpa." Among the letsenpa, there were also the fifth, the sixth and the seventh rank officials. Some of the tsidrung were ordinary tsidrung, but they were of the fifth rank and they were going to the dzong.   

**Q:**  Was it only among the tsidrung?   

**A:**  No, there were both.   

**Q:**  For example, among the lay officials, there were the letsenpa and those people. What would they call the fifth, sixth and seventh rank officials in the tsidrung?   

**A:**  The fifth and sixth ranks were called letsenpa, and there were also fifth and sixth ranks who were not letsenpa.   

**Q:**  The tsendrön were not letsenpa, but they were of the fifth rank, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were also fifth rank officials who were not tsendrön. There were some dzong—like Gyantse Dzong, which was called the fifth rank, togne ngapa [Tib. ཏོག་གནས་ང་པ]—but they were not letsenpa. So if someone just became a fifth rank official, it was not certain that they would become a letsenpa.   

**Q:**  When you first started off as an ordinary tsidrung, what rank would you have gotten?   

**A:**  The ordinary tsidrung [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ] didn't have any rank [Tib. རིམ་པ]. They just had the togne [Tib. ཏོག་གནས].   

**Q:**  They would not call them seventh rank [Tib. རིམ་པ], right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was just called the rank togne.   

**Q:**  Tell us about how the tsidrung would get the togne.   

**A:**  The lay officials and tsidrung were the same.   

**Q:**  What kind of togne did they have for positions like the official in charge of firewood [Tib. ཤིང་གཉེར] and the official in charge of the workers [Tib. བཟོ་ཁང་དོ་དམ་པ]?   

**A:**  The official in charge of firewood was probably the seventh rank letsenpa [Tib. རིམ་པ་བདུན་པའི་ལས་ཚན་པ].   

**Q:**  Was this the lowest rank among the tsidrung? What was the lowest?   

**A:**  It was the ordinary tsidrung [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ].   

**Q:**  Did the ordinary tsidrung have togne?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What togne [did] they have?   

**A:**  They had the togne from the fifth to the seventh among the ordinary tsidrung.   

**Q:**  How did you differentiate these three?   

**A:**  In the beginning, the ordinary tsidrung just had a togne and it was called the empty rank [Tib. ཏོག་སྟོང]. Then they could ask for the togne, like the sixth togne, though they didn't have a position in the dzong. If they could get the sixth togne, then it would have been easy to get the fifth togne. And it would have been easy to get a position in the dzong with the fifth togne.   

**Q:**  How could they have gotten the togne? Would they have gotten it from the dzong or what? Did they have to go ask for it? Was the ordinary tsidrung the lowest rank and the letsenpa was just above this?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was above the letsenpa?   

**A:**  There were some high and low letsenpa of which the tsendrön was the highest. The next was the shöndrön. The next was the fifth rank [Tib. གནས་ལྔ་པ] letsenpa, the sixth rank letsenpa [Tib. གནས་དྲུག་པའི་ལས་ཚན་པ], and the seventh rank letsenpa [Tib. གནས་བདུན་པའི་ལས་ཚན་པ].   

**Q:**  What was the fifth rank letsenpa?   

**A:**  They were like the treasurers: Tse nyertsang, Lhasa nyertsang and shölnyer [Tib. ཞོལ་གཉེར].   

**Q:**  The others, like the official in charge of the religious decorations [Tib. ཆོས་རྫས་དོ་དམ] and the official in charge of the scriptures [Tib. ཕྱག་དཔེ་དོ་དམ], were all letsenpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was above the letsenpa?   

**A:**  It was the khenjung.   

**Q:**  How many tsendrön were there?   

**A:**  There were probably 16-17 of them.   

**Q:**  How many shöndrön were there?   

**A:**  There were 7-8 of them.   

**Q:**  If there was the regent and also the prime minister, would there have been two nendrön?   

**A:**  There would have been just one.   

**Q:**  What was the rank of the lay officials?   

**A:**  It was the same.   

**Q:**  The lowest were the ordinary lay officials, kyüma.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Would they call them kyüma letsenpa?   

**A:**  They were the same [as the tsidrung].   

**Q:**  There were no tsendrön or shöndrön among the lay officials, right?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  There were also the fifth, sixth, and seventh rank [Tib. གནས] letsenpa among the lay officials, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the treasurers, like the Lhasa nyertsang and the shölnyer were of the fifth rank, and the kadrung were also of the fifth rank. The rupön were also probably fifth rank letsenpa.   

**Q:**  The tseja, laja, the head of the payroll [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན], and the tsipön were all of the fourth rank, right? What about the judicial system where the civil disputes were settled, Gyöship?   

**A:**  Yes, the head of the Gyöship was Yuthok. After he became the katsab, Menkyiling [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང] became the head.   

**Q:**  The head of the Gyöship was a third rank official, dzasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Among the tsidrung, there were three class/ ranks [Tib. གྲལ་རིམ]: the better tsidrung [Tib. དྲུང་དྲག], the middle tsidrung [Tib. དྲུང་འབྲིང] and the ordinary tsidrung [Tib. དྲུང་དཀྱུས]. What was the difference between them?   

**A:**  I don't know who those people were. Anyway, probably, the tsidrung who had large estates were the better ones and the tsidrung who had smaller estates than that were in the middle class. Those who had small estates were the ordinary tsidrung.   

**Q:**  But most of the tsidrung probably didn't have estates. So they belonged to the ordinary tsidrung, right? When you were the tsidrung, how many better tsidrung, middle tsidrung, and ordinary tsidrung were there?   

**A:**  There were several tsidrung who had bigger estates who were called the better ones, and the next were those who had slightly smaller estates, and they were the middle class. And the ordinary tsidrung didn't have estates.   

**Q:**  Tsidrung like Trekhang and Rong Namsey (Jawdang) [Tib. རོང་རྣམ་སྲས] were the better ones, right?   

**A:**  Tsidrung like Barshi [Tib. བར་གཞིས] had very large estates.   

**Q:**  But, most tsidrung didn't [have] estates, right?   

**A:**  Yes, most of them didn't have estates.   

**Q:**  So they became ordinary tsidrung, right?   

**Q:**  How many tsidrung were there when you became a tsidrung?   

**A:**  The limit was 175 tsidrung.   

**Q:**  But, actually, there were more than that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were a few more than that.   

**Q:**  Supposing there were 200 tsidrung, were there about 20 who had estates?   

**A:**  There were less than that.   

**Q:**  At that time, you had estates. But how could the tsidrung recruited from the great monasteries as a tax [Tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] and who became the tsidrung through the Tse labdra [Tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ], have made their living?   

**A:**  In the early times, there were the students in the Tse labdra who were recruited to become tsidrung as a tax. Later, though, in 1954, there were just four to five of them.   

**Q:**  It was not in 1954 when you became the tsidrung, right?   

**A:**  At that time, I was living in India.   

**Q:**  How about at the time of Taktra?   

**A:**  There were only 7-10 of them.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the better class tsidrung?   

**A:**  No, I mean the students in the Tse labdra.   

**Q:**  Where did they come from?   

**A:**  There were two different kinds of Tse labdra students: the private students [Tib. སྒེར་པ] and the government students [Tib. གཞུང་པ]. The government students were those recruited from the monasteries as a tax. Some of them were also from government official families, they were called private students.   

**Q:**  Were the government students poorer?   

**A:**  Not really poorer, they were recruited as a tax.   

**Q:**  You didn't go to the Tse labdra, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were more tsidrung who didn't go to the Tse labdra.   

**Q:**  I heard that it was very hard to become a tsidrung from the Tse labdra?   

**A:**  They just went through the motion of saying that. Actually, some of them had some difficulties and some of them were better. Since they were recruited into the Tse labdra, they had equal rights to become a tsidrung, but they had to select some of them at one time according to the exam.   

**Q:**  It was not only through the exam, they were pulling up many of them. So there were very old students left there in the Tse labdra, right? Did you have to go show what you looked like (appearance) in front of the authorities [Tib. མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What would that have been [like]? Please, tell us in detail how did you go there to do that?   

**A:**  I just wore my regular clothes.   

**Q:**  Did you get dressed up?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any ceremony at home, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This was after you applied to the Yigtsang, right?   

**A:**  As for me, I didn't need to do that because my application was granted. Usually, there were two new tsidrung at the New Year. For the two tsidrung, there were four candidates selected and the Yigtsang would send the notice. After that, they would wear their monk's robe that they used to wear in the monastery and go show themselves at the front of the Tseja.   

**Q:**  They didn't wear the brocade vest [Tib. གོས་ཆེན་སྟོད་འགག], did they?   

**A:**  Usually—if they would wear it regularly, then they would wear it. Then they would have had to go to the front of the Tseja Office. When they were made to stay there, the Dalai Lama or the regent could see them through the windows.   

**Q:**  Did somebody tell them to come on that day?   

**A:**  Then two of them would be selected by the Yigtsang from among the four.   

**Q:**  Did they have to stand over there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they know that the Dalai Lama was looking at them?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What else would the Dalai Lama do?   

**A:**  He would just have a look. That's all that it was.   

**Q:**  Didn't he look at their handwriting?   

**A:**  This was done before that. This was just to show their appearance.   

**Q:**  Where did they check their handwriting?   

**A:**  They checked that in the Yigtsang. They just had to write something and submit it to the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  Did they put a mark on it?   

**A:**  There wasn't any mark on it.   

**Q:**  Did you have to write it there in the Yigtsang or could you write it at home and submit it in the Yigtsang?   

**A:**  You had to write it in front of them.   

**Q:**  Did they dictate to you what to write?   

**A:**  You could write whatever you liked.   

**Q:**  How much did you have to write?   

**A:**  I had to write a Tsugtung, a form of alphabet that's not as small as cursive. And then the Tsugmakhyug [Tib. ཚུགས་མ་འཁྱུག], smaller letters mixed with cursive [Tib. འཁྱུག]. I could write whatever verses I wanted to write, like a verse praising the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Would this writing go up to the regent? Or did it just go to the Yigtsang?   

**A:**    

**Q:**  What would the four people do when they were standing there?   

**A:**  We didn't need to do anything. We just had to stand over there. Somebody would give all of us a sign.   

**Q:**  Then you had to go back, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What would happen then?   

**A:**  Then it would be decided and they would receive notice regarding whoever may be appointed according to the plan and the approval [Tib. འཆར་གཞི་ཕྱག་རྟགས].   

**Q:**  Would they receive notice on that day?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What happened to the other two?   

**A:**  They would get the next chance.   

**Q:**  If they didn't get it on the next chance?   

**A:**  If somebody didn't get it even after two chances, they might have gotten it on the third or the fourth chance.   

**Q:**  Eventually, they would get it, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after two chances they would get it.   

**Q:**  As for the tsidrung, didn't you have to offer the khata called the reporting khata [Tib. སྙན་སེང་མཇལ་དར]?   

**A:**  Yes, it was called the "reporting khata for becoming a tsidrung," Shabdö Nyendar [Tib. ཞབས་སྡོད་སྙན་དར].   

**Q:**  I heard that sometimes they would return the khata. When did you have to offer this reporting khata?   

**A:**  This must have been the first step for seeking permission to become a tsidrung.   

**Q:**  They should have sought this permission from the Yigtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this khata should have been a nangdzö.   

**Q:**  I heard that if the khata was not good (quality), they would return it to them.   

**A:**  It was regarded as an important thing.   

**Q:**  Among the 200 tsidrung, how many would go through the Tse labdra school?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there were not many people who wanted to become a tsidrung. So they set up the Tse labdra, but later, they became tsidrung directly, and the Tse labdra sort of became unnecessary and there were just a few students. The lessons were good, but it had strict discipline, so just a few students joined the school.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, all the tsidrung coming from the three great monasteries had to go through the Tse labdra and gradually, they would become tsidrung, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At the time of the two regents, Taktra and Reting, how many tsidrung went through the Tse labdra and how many of them became tsidrung directly?   

**A:**  I can't tell you clearly. Anyway, later on, there were only four to five students in the Tse labdra. Compared to the tsidrung who went through the Tse labdra with the tsidrung who didn't go through the Tse labdra, there were more tsidrung who didn't go through the Tse labdra.   

**Q:**  How many more?   

**A:**  I can't tell you that.   

**Q:**  What percentage?   

**A:**  There were more than 20-30 percent who didn't go through the Tse labdra.   

**Q:**  Later, there were no more students going to the Tse labdra, right?   

**A:**  I heard that they had a plan for the Tse labdra to make changes for recruiting new students.   

**Q:**  Did they call your household a shagtsang or a kudrak's household, simshag [Tib. གཟིམ་ཤག]?   

**A:**  Yes, it was called a shagtsang.   

**Q:**  What exactly is a shagtsang?   

**A:**  Shag means home.   

**Q:**  Some of them are called shagtsang and some are not. What is a shagtsang?   

**A:**  The shag that had better living conditions many pupils were called shagtsang.   

**Q:**  In the monasteries, there were two to three pupils in one shagtsang. The tsidrung probably only had one to two pupils, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How would they manage their shagtsang? They should have kept at least one pupil [in order] to become a tsidrung in the future, right? Some of them also had two pupils, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was called a shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Did all the tsidrung have a shagtsang?   

**A:**  Every tsidrung did not necessarily have a shagtsang. If they had someone to become a tsidrung, then they had a shagtsang. If they didn't have that, then they didn't have a shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Did they become tsidrung in the shagtsang for inheriting property [Tib. རྒྱུད་པ་འཛིན]?   

**A:**  It was something like that.   

**Q:**  Suppose you, Kungö, were to keep a pupil who was related to you or a lover. Would he inherit all of your property, like the things you got from the dzong and the things with which people bribed you after the main person died?   

**A:**  Yes, he could get them.   

**Q:**  Suppose there was a greedy tsidrung. Among the positions of the tsidrung, with which of the positions would he get more bribes?   

**A:**  There wasn't any difference between the lay officials and tsidrung on this matter. It depended on whether the dzong had a good income or not.   

**Q:**  Among the offices in Lhasa, like the treasury, Nyertsang, and the Branch Judicial Office for settling civil disputes [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ], which of the offices would receive the most bribes?   

**A:**  In the past, the Laja and Tseja were considered as good sources of income.   

**Q:**  They would take loans from the government, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I mean for making private money. Did the Yigtsang also have that income?   

**A:**  The trunyichemmo of the Yigtsang also probably had a private income. It was because they had the power.   

**Q:**  Normally, when you would go to the office, what daily work would you do, starting from the morning? Was there anyone making you do work or what? What time would you start working?   

**A:**  We had to arrive at the office at 10 a.m. There wasn't any lunch break and we would work until 4 p.m. When there was a lot of work, we would work until 5-6 p.m. Each office had different work and the leader would assign the work.   

**Q:**  Who was the person who assigned your work?   

**A:**  It was Tsarong and Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང].   

**Q:**  Who would tell you to work?   

**A:**  In our office, the work was mostly to receive and pay money. The work was assigned earlier and each person would do their work. They didn't need to assign the work daily.   

**Q:**  What were you doing at that time?   

**A:**  I was printing currency.   

**Q:**  Did they print currency every day?   

**A:**  I was printing coins, like silver coins and copper coins.   

**Q:**  You also printed paper currency, right?   

**A:**  There were separate people printing paper currency.   

**Q:**  Among the copper currency printers, there might have been different sections, like ones for printing five sho [Tib. ཞོ] coins and one sho coins, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were workers from the master coppersmiths [Tib. བཟོ་པའི་ཆེན་མོ་བ] to the ordinary women workers.   

**Q:**  You were in charge of printing all the copper coins, like the one sho, seven and a half karma [Tib. སྐརྨ], which was called chegye [Tib. ཕྱེད་བརྒྱད], and the karma, right?   

**A:**  Later, only the five sho coins were printed.   

**Q:**  When you would go to the office at 10 a.m., were there chairs to sit down or would you sit cross-legged?   

**A:**  We would sit cross-legged.   

**Q:**  Did you have your own cushion?   

**A:**  There were long cushions placed on both sides and we would sit on them.   

**Q:**  Did all of you sit in one office?   

**A:**  Yes, the kungö would sit at the upper part of the room.   

**Q:**  Then what would you do?   

**A:**  Then they would assign the work and we would do our own work, and there were many people coming to the office.   

**Q:**  Would they tell you to copy this letter and make this plan?   

**A:**  Yes, when somebody brought money, we had to count the money, and sign the receipt and deliver the money to the person in charge. And there were also people taking out money.   

**Q:**  Who would bring in money?   

**A:**  People would come to repay borrowed money.   

**Q:**  If you wanted to change your position, like to become a dzongpön, how could you change it?   

**A:**  In every country, it is the same. While you are working here, you are thinking of going to another position.   

**Q:**  How would you try?   

**A:**  We had to go to see a kalön.   

**Q:**  As a tsidrung, you had to find a trunyichemmo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The kalön would appoint the dzongpön, right?   

**A:**  Later, after the dzong were nationalized [Tib. རྫོང་གཞིས་གཞུང་འཛིན], there wasn't anything like this. Not only the kalön, but also the trunyichemmo and the tsipön, had to meet together and appoint the dzongpön.   

**Q:**  When did that happen?   

**A:**  This was probably in 1948-49. Before that, some of the dzong [dzongpön] were appointed by the Kashag and some of them were appointed by the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  When they were appointing the dzongpön separately, if you wanted to become a dzongpön, did you have to request permission from the Yigtsang?   

**A:**  If we wanted to become a dzongpön while we were working in Lhasa, we were allowed to request permission from the Yigtsang to be appointed as the dzongpön, no matter whether they would grant the position or not.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go in person to request that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the case that Yigtsang wanted to send you to a dzong, and you didn't want to go, could you do something to avoid from being sent there?   

**A:**  That would have been quite hard.   

**Q:**  Could you do that sometimes?   

**A:**  Yes, we could do that sometimes, but mostly, it was impossible. There weren't many dzong where people wanted to go. Some people didn't want to go even if the dzong was good.   

**Q:**  Some of the foreigners considered the tsidrung to belong to the monks. But, according to my point of view, the lay officials and tsidrung were government officials and they were better off, and the three great monasteries were separate. The tsidrung were monks and they had loyalty towards the government, but the monks in the three great monasteries didn't think about the government, right?   

**A:**  The people outside would have thought that all the tsidrung came from one of the great monasteries. So they would stand on the side of the monastery.   

**Q:**  What was the main regular job of the jigyab khembo?   

**A:**  The main job was to attend to the Dalai Lama as his personal attendant, and he was also the general chief of all the monastic organizations and monks [Tib. སེར་མོ་བ་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].   

**Q:**  Was he supposed to be the head of the Yigtsang?   

**A:**  The Yigtsang had to ask the jigyab khembo when there were important matters.   

**Q:**  There was also a separate office of the jigyab khembo called Khembotsang [Tib. མཁན་པོ་ཚང], and the chandzö used to be very powerful, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the work of Khembotsang in the government?   

**A:**  It was the general office of all the monastic organizations and monks, and sometimes, when there were important matters, the jigyab khembo would go to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't the jigyab khembo have to look over the treasury in the Potala [Tib. གནམ་སྲས་གན་མཛོད]?   

**A:**  No, that was the Kashag.   

**Q:**  I mean the treasury dzöbu [Tib. མཛོད་སྦུག].   

**A:**  This was the job of the personal attendants of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Usually, the jigyab khembo had to stay in Norbulinga permanently, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When he had to go outside, did he have to ask to leave?   

**A:**  Do you mean when he would go to Lhasa?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I don't have any idea.   

**Q:**  During the ceremonies, he would have to stand the entire time, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  During the ceremonies, the jigyab khembo would also have to hold a khata, nangdzö, and hold the Dalai Lama's hand [Tib. ཕྱག་འདྲེན] with the kalön who stayed in Norbulinga, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in the Kashag, the jigyab khembo also had the same rank as the kalön.   

**Q:**  But, usually, who would sit at the head? The kalön or the jigyab khembo?   

**A:**  The kalön would probably sit at the head.   

**Q:**  Were the kalön higher?   

**A:**  No, they had equal rank, but the kalön would sit at the head.   

**Q:**  If the kalön lama would sit at the head, how would the jigyab khembo become the general chief of all the monastic organizations?   

**A:**    

**Q:**  Where did the jigyab khembo stay?   

**A:**  He stayed in Khembotsang in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  They had an office there, right?   

