# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0008.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 21 July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:**  Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chabtsom [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ] was a lay aristocratic official who was a tsiba in 1950 and then was appointed a Kashag Secretary (gadrung) when the Council of Ministers (Kashag) left for Yadong in 1950. He later went back to working as a tsiba when the Kashag and Dalai Lama came back to Lhasa in 1951. He was appointed the head of the Shigatse dzong in 1953 and stayed there until 1957. He then became the Governor General of Yadong [Tib. གྲོ་མོ་སྤྱི་རྒྱབ] and while there he became an intermediary between Jenkhentsisum and Lhasa. In this interview, he talks about the Sitsab and Kashag sending petitions to Yadong asking the Dalai Lama to return, about Ngabö explaining the 17-Point Agreement in the Assembly Meeting in Lhasa, and about disagreements with the Chinese in Lhasa. He also discusses how a branch office of the TAR was set up in Shigatse and what general Muja (depön) told him about the war in Chamdo.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0008_02/H_0008_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1950, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the kalön first heard about the Agreement, what was the term "Gongtong Gangling"?   

**A:**  It was in the Agreement, but we didn't know what it meant and we didn't ask about it. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> were saying that this was a very unclear word and we don't know what was meant by this term.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> three groups were sent from Lhasa. One probably from the three great monasteries and one from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> asking him to return to Lhasa. Is this correct?   

**A:**  They weren't groups per say. As for the three great monasteries, they were against his going to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> in the first place saying, "There is no danger in Lhasa. We are going to send representatives of the three great monasteries, and the monk and lay officials to talk with the Chinese." They did send people down and they were supposed to go wherever they found the Chinese and hold discussions. About 30-40 from each monastery [went] and there were also monk and lay officials. They got only as far as Giamda. The three great monasteries insisted and told the Dalai Lama he didn't have to go to Yadong, but the government officials said, "We will not be able to bear the danger because the Chinese Communist Party have plots and they have many people in Lhasa. If these people rise up, there would be a danger to the Dalai Lama's life." So it was the government officials who argued strongly for the Dalai Lama going to Yadong and the three great monasteries lost out. After the Dalai Lama was in Yadong, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and Kashag said that we must write to the Dalai Lama and they sent letters several times to the Dalai Lama saying that we wanted him to return. The letter said, "There is a difference between the previous situation and the present. In the past, there were a lot of rumors but we have checked everywhere and now there is no danger at all." Earlier we didn't have the custom of sending spies, but after that we did and were able to find out intelligence. For example, we sent spies to keep an eye on the lamas from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> because it was not certain what kind of plot they might have had. We sent several letters like this, but I don't recall any delegations. We received several petitions from the three great monasteries who came to us saying that some government officials and a group from Kalimpong led by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> were trying to get the Dalai Lama to go to India. So we had to try and ensure that this didn't happen and that he will return to Lhasa. And the ex-abbot Gyepa Khensur Jambey Trinley [Tib. རྒྱས་པ་མཁེན་ཟུར་འཇམ་དཔལ་འཕྲིན་ལས], who was then the senior abbot, was knowledgeable in both politics and also dialectics and had passed the Geshe degree exam, he was very much worried and came to the Kashag and said, "Now is not the time for the Dalai Lama to go out. There are many rumors coming from the foreign countries, so if one follows the rumors, it is not okay at all. You should write in your letter to the Dalai Lama that the Gyepa Khensur says return. At present, the peace agreement is signed, but how could we say for sure that at one time, it will be good. We can't say that because the policy of the Chinese Communist Party did this. He can think about going out gradually. He left in haste for Yadong and people feel empty. Now If he would go out from Yadong in a hasty manner, it will not be good." And he said that the Dalai Lama was young, only 16, and didn't have much political experience [so he could be tricked]. So the sitsab and the Kashag said that this was good and I was told to write the letter to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  The U.S. told the Dalai Lama through a person that even though the 17-Point Agreement was signed, he didn't have to accept it. It would be better not to accept it. He should oppose it. I have the documents. Did you hear about what the Americans had said? Did the Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> write a letter telling the Dalai Lama not to acknowledge the Agreement and return to Lhasa?   

**A:**  At that time, they did not announce the American letter. At the time, for the time being we didn't have any choice but to sign the Agreement. Whoever one asked, you would know that the Tibetans didn't agree to it. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the Kashag didn't openly tell the Dalai Lama that he didn't need to accept it. If they had said that, since this is important, I would have remembered this. However if the Dalai Lama wrote something to the sitsab saying this and the sitsab didn't tell the Kashag, then I wouldn't know. After the signing, the sitsab gave the very strong appearance of not accepting the Agreement. They also verbally attacked and opposed it.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa, I heard there was a Full Assembly (tsondu gyendzom) about whether or not to accept the Agreement.   

**A:**  Yes. After Ngabö and the Dalai Lama returned. Ngabö spoke to the Assembly and explained all the events that happened from the time he went as Governor General of Kham, and how he defended [against the Chinese] step by step.   

**Q:**  Did he say that at the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, he did. He started the meeting by saying how he became the Governor General and then about signing the Agreement. And he said finally that, "We couldn't hold that place [Chamdo] because the People's Liberation Army came from all directions. When I found that the only thing was that we were going to lose, I set the armory on fire." They tried to flee (to Lhasa) through Riwoche, but were caught. Then Ngabö said that he did his best to oppose the Chinese, "But leave alone my life being in danger, the Chinese didn't even say any harsh words to me. They did the same to all of my officials." When he went to Beijing to negotiate the Agreement, Ngabö wrote the Kashag a letter saying, "I'm going to China to negotiate so it's not appropriate to go with [traditional] long hair so I'm cutting my hair." I saw this letter. The letter didn't say [specifically] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> or the Dalai Lama, it just said to inform the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Did he cut off his hair to be in accordance with the modern custom?   

**A:**  Yes. He said, "Since I am going as the delegate of the Tibetan government, it is not okay for me to go with braids." Then he explained the Agreement in detail. He started with a discussion of some history. In past history, there was a close historical relationship between Tibet and the People's Republic of China, but this was broken during the 13th Dalai Lama's time. "Thus, I tried to avoid military liberation and in its place have peaceful liberation, and thus negotiated the 17-Point Agreement [to accomplish this]." Then he explained each of the 17 points in the Agreement. The Full Assembly and all of the government officials were there, and Ngabö was wearing a Mongolian dress because his hair was short [note: with short hair he could not wear the official dresss]. Then he said, "I can't go into too much detail. Soon via the Kashag and other offices this will be explained." He said, "What is the most important thing for Tibet? It is continuing without change the stable political power of the system of religion and politics combined together [Tib. ཆོས་སྲིད་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ]. And for this, the Dalai Lama is the head of the political system and he is going to be the same. According to the national policy, we also need Tibet to maintain its own customs and habits and not to adopt Chinese ones. And the most important of the important is that the religion isn't changed. This is guaranteed." He said that if we put into practice this Agreement, Tibet's political system would be guaranteed to continue. The old government's political system, which was the feudal system, would change gradually, but not the position of the Dalai Lama. However, he said, "We, the manorial estate lords (Tib. ངདག), will lose our serfs but our livelihood will increase, not decrease. So if the livelihood of the masses improves, isn't that what we want?" As I said earlier, about 90 percent of Tibetan officials didn't like this Agreement. Most officials said that Ngabö just said this because he had to go do this work. He said it nicely, but it would be hard to put that into practice because people had heard a lot about the national policy of mainland China. They felt this because of the letter from Yungun Dzasa and due to what they had been hearing from China.   

**Q:**  Was there anybody disagreeing with what he said?   

**A:**  Not at all.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> weren't there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Kashag was also not there. Ngabö had to give the talk. Normally, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the Kashag would not attend the Assembly meetings. Nowadays at conferences we say strongly that in the past Ngabö said that there were guarantees for no change of religion and guarantees for minority culture, but nowadays these are not to be seen. So we protest against this at Political Consultative Conference meetings because now we are allowed to say a little bit about these. We say this regardless of whether the Chinese Communist Party likes it or not. We say we can forget about the Cultural Revolution, because the People's Republic of China itself is accepting that the Cultural Revolution was extremely leftist, so it would not be okay if they don't restore the three great monasteries and the Tibetan language. We are always complaining about this. We are nothing as a minority if we don't have the proper use of language. Nationality is formed by different languages. Otherwise, all people are the same, having eyes, mouths and legs. Now, they do not tell us that it is bad to say such things.   

**Q:**  Did he explain why he didn't send telegrams while they were discussing the Agreement?   

**A:**  No. And after Ngabö, Kheme spoke, and then Lhautara spoke similarly. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and Thubden Lengmön didn't speak, as they were lower officials. The three of them were the main delegates.   

**Q:**  I heard that Ngabö said, "I think this Agreement is good because the Dalai Lama will be there as before, so now I'm leaving the meeting and you discuss and decide what you think is best."   

**A:**  No. He didn't say that and he would not say that. But it has been 42 years since then, so it is like a dream for me.   

**Q:**  So there was agreement?   

**A:**  There was no discussion at the meeting at all.   

**Q:**  In 1951, do you recall when Gyalo Thondup came to Lhasa? Did he come to the Kashag?   

**A:**  No. I don't recall that. If this was in 1952-53, I was not in Lhasa. I was at the Shigatse Dzong.   

**Q:**  After this there were disagreements with the Chinese, e.g. over selling grain and on converting the Tibetan army. Can you talk about these in detail?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. There were problems on building the road from Sichuan to Tibet. They had built a lot below [east of] Chamdo, but since Chamdo belonged to Tibet, we had to sell grain, butter and meat to the workers from the local places. I don't know what the Kashag said because I was not there, but I know how much grain we had in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> there. I heard that they didn't sell the grain to the workers willingly. I don't know whether the Kashag explicitly told the dzong not to sell. It was also said they were not sending workers to work even if the Chinese told them they would pay them enough <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> and food. Maybe the government was stopping them. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> also were accused by the Chinese of not putting the 17-Point Agreement into practice. There were a lot of complaints about this and fights when they met to discuss these problems. So these two had to resign. After this, there were no verbal fights or insults like before. The Kashag used clever strategies with the Chinese. They didn't just do what the Chinese wanted. The government had stored lots of grain in the different dzong and the misers also had grain, but they only sold the Chinese small amounts at a time saying, "If we sell all that we have, we will have a hard time."   

**Q:**  After Chamdo became a liberation area, did the Kashag ever demand that Chamdo be returned?   

**A:**  While I was there, nothing at all was said during that one year. They couldn't demand that because Chamdo was liberated by force. Although the People's Liberation Army had not actually arrived in the adjacent areas, like in Khyungpo and Riwoche, there were lots of ramifications and the poor <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>s weren't listening to or obeying the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> heads. The Kashag got lots of reports about this. Some of the dzong heads were afraid for their lives and fled to Lhasa. When these dzong heads arrived in Lhasa they were told, "You shouldn't have left since the Chinese hadn't arrived." But the dzong heads said the miser wouldn't listen to them and the dzong's local officials also wouldn't listen. And if we tried to say nasty things to them, there was a danger that they would kill us. If there were Tibetan troops there the miser wouldn't have dared do this, but all the troops had left, so the dzong heads also had to leave.   

**Q:**  I've read the 17-Point Agreement many times and I don't see where the Military Administrative Committee would replace the Tibetan government and where the Tibet Autonomous Region was to substitute the Tibetan government. So were you worried about this substitution from the start?   

**A:**  The Military Administrative Committee was set up in Yuthok House. If it was started, there would have been <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in it. Its name included military and politics so it would have had soldiers and would have been trouble. From 1951, there was talk of transforming the Tibetan army into the People's Liberation Army, so at this time the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> opposed the army transformation saying everything had to be done slowly and gradually because this was a matter concerning a country. The people wouldn't like it if it was done fast. The Chinese were saying that the sitsab were only pretending to be sincere, but that talking about the people not liking it was putting on a mask and coming to talk [means the mask is using the name of the people]. "Really you two [sitsab] don't like it." They said that to me [about the mask]. Then the Chinese asked if we would ask the people about this? We said "No, but the two sitsab know the feelings of the people." There was talk saying that setting up the Military Administrative Committee was a great danger and that it was not good. It would not be okay to set it up because while military and politics were needed, the people who worked on politics should work on politics. The military was for defending the border from foreigners and putting down special disturbances inside the country. If politics was mixed with military affairs, this was not acceptable at all. We worried a lot about this. Then the Chinese said, "If you don't want the Military Administrative Committee that is all right. We can install the Autonomous Region." [Note: he refers to later in 1954-55]. When I was in Shigatse, they started a Shigatse Branch [Administrative Office, Ch. ban shi qu] for the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, and the two of us <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> heads were told to work in the main office [Ch. ban gong shi]. We were called when all the big decisions had to be made. We were given a title and salary for being in it. It was good that the Military Administrative Committee was never started since it represented a real danger [to the Tibetan government]. The three great monasteries and kudrak were all opposed to this. I knew a Sera lama who said it would be a disaster if there was the Military Administrative Committee. In Shigatse, there were many new offices under the Branch office dealing with the development of farmers and nomads, road construction, health, and forest development. All the officials in Shigatse below us, like the clerks, were divided up and appointed to work in these offices and they received salary for this.   

**Q:**  What was the difference between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and these other offices [Ch. ban shi qu]? How did they explain this?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> continued the usual old society work like collecting taxes, etc. The branch office did the more modern tasks such as development with farmers, nomads, education, security, development, road construction, health, like hospitals, economic construction, and forest development. They did things like investigating making new irrigation canals, seed preparation, etc. For the nomads, they investigated how to improve cattle, etc. The education office did a lot. In Shigatse city, 13 Primary Schools were started.   

**Q:**  How many people did Shigatse have when you were there?   

**A:**  There were 12,000-13,000 for the entire Shigatse area, not just the city proper.   

**Q:**  And for the Tibetans alone?   

**A:**  Yes, this was not the city only. It was the population in all the areas of Shigatse.   

**Q:**  What was the population in the city only?   

**A:**  It was much less. In the past, there were some private schools and there were just 1-2 government schools. Later, the schools improved a lot. The education office did work like organizing teachers and getting students, etc.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> collected the taxes and made the judicial decisions. Did it do anything else?   

**A:**  We did these things because it was still just a preparatory Tibet Autonomous Region, and [responsibilities] had not really been handed over to the Tibet Autonomous Region. There was a Chinese Public Security Office [Ch. gong an]. If they saw some fights, etc., they notified us and we settled it.   

**Q:**  Who had the authority to do things, e.g., start the 13 new schools? Did the Tibet Autonomous Region have the power or did they make the plans?   

**A:**  For starting schools, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the Kashag did not interfere because the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up [They didn't have to give permission]. The education office toured the district and then decided that we should have a school here and there. Once this was decided, they went to the dzong and explained the plan to start a school. They told us, "Please advise the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of these areas to send their kids to the school and they will have a good future." These officials told us that the schools would teach only Tibetan and no Chinese until the 3rd grade. The Chinese in the education office didn't go around checking locations, it was the government and the Labrang [Panchen Lama's] officials who did this.   

**Q:**  Could you say, 'We don't want the schools,' when they came to you?   

**A:**  No, we couldn't. We had to cooperate with them.   

**Q:**  Where did the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region's income come from if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> was [still] collecting taxes?   

**A:**  It all came from China. There were lots of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coins. Earlier, the Chinese said that since we have to pay a large amount of salary, we are going to use paper currency, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> had objected to issuing paper money for Tibet. I was not there at that time. So dayan were used exclusively for the schools, health, etc. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> didn't have to spend anything.   

**Q:**  In the offices where there were Tibetans and Chinese, did you appoint the Tibetans?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. We discussed this in the Administrative Office and they said that the Labrang and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> had to send such and such number of people. The Labrang would send their people and we would think up the names of appropriate staff workers and other additional people. We would decide on who to appoint.   

**Q:**  You were told by the Dalai Lama to make good relations with Labrang. What happened after you arrived?   

**A:**  At that time, there was a danger that the people working underneath would cause some contradictions. Before me, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> heads were Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] Depön and Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen [later of Jenkhentsisum fame].   

**Q:**  What did Muja say about the war in Chamdo?   

**A:**  When he first arrived in Lhasa, I was in the Kashag. The Dalai Lama was in Yadong. His wife and I are relatives. He told me how he fought, saying that he showed great bravery. He was a fighter, but was not very good at civil affairs.   

**Q:**  Did he say anything about the war like 'if we had done this and that we could have won the war?'   

**A:**  He said we didn't do well since there was no unity among the Tibetan forces. For example, the Tadang Regiment under Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས] surrendered without a fight. This made the soldiers lose enthusiasm about fighting.   

**Q:**  Did Muja say that he could have fought and escaped but Ngabö wanted him to surrender?   

**A:**  No, I never heard that. He said, "In our battles, Rupön Bügangga [Tib. སྦུད་ཁང་ཝ] died in a fight which made us [the army] lose one's right shoulder. But since I survived by the grace of the Tibetan government, I still tried to block the Chinese. But then they got through." The surrender of the Tadang Regiment made us lose the battle. Otherwise, it would not have been so bad because we were fighting in our own place and we were familiar with the places and the people.   

**Q:**  Did he say anything about the Khambas not helping?   

**A:**  No. He was in Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ] and said the Khambas helped him.   

**Q:**  Did he say anything about the Khambas in the eastern side of the Yangtze River helping the People's Liberation Army and that they were very bad?   

**A:**  No   

**Q:**  Did your officials think this?   

**A:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> did think this. There was a monk official named Lobsang Thöndrup from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> with Ngabö and when I returned, he said that the eastern Khambas helped the Chinese a lot. The poor Khambas did this of course, but rich ones did so also. Maybe they thought that unless they did this, their property would be robbed. When Muja and Lobsang Gyentsen were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> heads, they had a dispute with Labrang. They acted tough and arrogant, as if Labrang wasn't important. Then the Dalai Lama said strongly that when I left, I had to establish good relations with Labrang. So I had this in mind. I had a relative in Labrang, so I went to my friend and said at once, "If there are problems you have with us and things you want done, come to me and we can correct the mistakes."   

**Q:**  Does Shigatse City belong to Labrang or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>?   

**A:**  Both mixed. Side by side all mixed up.   

**Q:**  Was his rank relatively high?   

**A:**  Yes, he was called Denyul Lhunpo [Tib. ལྡན་ཡུལ་ལྷུན་པོ]. When I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> head we had no problems with Labrang. I also stayed in a school in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Monastery when I was a child. So I was familiar with the monastery and I knew many people.   

**Q:**  What was the attitude of the masses in Shigatse about the Chinese coming? Was it negative like in Lhasa?   

**A:**  In the past, there was a Panchen candidate in Pagshö who was studying in Drepung monastery, but after the arrival of the People's Liberation Army, the late Panchen Lama came and the Tibetan government had to accept it. So Labrang thought that if the People's Liberation Army hadn't come, it would be hard for the Panchen Lama to return. So the Shigatse people associated the coming of the Chinese with the return of the Panchen Lama. They didn't dislike the Chinese, but they also didn't specifically like the Chinese. And there was a lot of talk at the time. Actually, the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama are teacher and disciple. So we should respect both of them.   

**Q:**  When you held the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, what were your relations with the Chinese before the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was started?   

**A:**  Labrang handled its own people and we handled ours. The trouble was that there were fights between the two [sets of] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>s living in Shigatse and that caused some trouble. The one in charge of legal things for Labrang was Gamu Para, who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> [Tib. ཞོལ] headman (gembo). He was the headman of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> miser. We had a good friendly relationship with him, so if there was a fight we would turn over their miser to him and they would settle it. They also did the same with us.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese military officers come to ask you to sell grain?   

**A:**  They would not. If the Chinese asked us to sell grain we would tell them to seek permission from the Kashag. If they did get permission we would sell it. It was the same when they wanted workers for road building. If the Kashag said okay, we did it. Otherwise not.   

**Q:**  Tell me about the representatives Lhabju and Bisu who you sent to Lhasa. I heard the monks threatened that they were going to kill them and they had to hide in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>?   

**A:**  When Bisu and Lhabju returned from Lhasa to Shigatse, the Labrang misers said they had gone as representatives of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [to welcome the Dalai Lama on his return from China in 1955], but Labrang misers are also from Tsang and we didn't send them (to represent us). This was just before I finished my term as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> head.   

**Q:**  They were sent for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a> (welcoming committee), right?   

**A:**  Yes, at first they were sent for the denshu. Then the Labrang people said, "You have to turn the representatives over to us" [Note: this was what the Tashilhunpo monks said]. We didn't want to do this [as they might kill them] so we kept them inside the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. Then the headman Gamu Para and a Labrang monk official came to us asking us to turn them over to them. We said, "No, this is a small matter. Their going to Lhasa as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> representatives did not harm the reputation of Labrang. So let's forget about this." They didn't argue with us and left. The Dalai Lama came to Shigatse on his way to India. We then received an order from the Tibet Autonomous Region (with the Kashag) telling us to send Lhabju to Lhasa [for arrest with Alo Chöndze]. We sent Bisu to Lhasa when the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa. At that time, the Dalai Lama stayed in the dzong in Shigatse.   

**Q:**  What happened to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Kyilma [the 3rd Tsang representative]?   

**A:**  We later made an agreement with Labrang and he was allowed to go home and live.   

**Q:**  Did you have any relationship with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> while you were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> head?   

**A:**  No. It started when I went to Phari. At Phari we had to handle the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> [duties] and collect wool taxes. My partner was Thubden Sangye [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་སངས་རྒྱས].   

**Q:**  How did you first make the connection with them?   

**A:**  At Phari we were like a customs post stopping people from coming and going, and collecting the wool custom taxes. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> wrote asking me not to block <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> people from traveling back and forth. They said, "Please help them." This letter was brought by a person. It was in the name of the three of them [Jenkhentsisum]. I was arrested for this [after 1959] and when I was arrested they found all of these letters.   

**Q:**  Didn't you burn them?   

**A:**  No. Also the letters I sent to the others regarding this were given to the Chinese so I had no way to escape.   

**Q:**  To whom did you write letters to in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> people back and forth and didn't stop them. At this time, the Chinese weren't strict (about opening bags, etc.), so it was easy to send letters up and down. The letters coming up were mostly going to Khambas who were doing wool business.   

**Q:**  Did your partner know of this?   

**A:**  I kept it a secret from him.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese army come and tell you to stop the letters and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> people?   

**A:**  No. They said nothing. There were a few border guards and some other Chinese officials working on roads there, but not many. The officials sometimes came to us to ask for laborers, but nothing about politics.   

**Q:**  What did the printed materials <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> sent say?   

**A:**  "The communists' policies are terrible. They want to eliminate religion. You shouldn't allow yourselves to be duped by them. Now they are tactful and pleasant in their speech, but later on, they won't allow this easily." They generally said things like this in their propaganda. At that time, we told them that you should work hard for Tibetan independence.   

