# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0008.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:**  Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chabtsom [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ] was a lay aristocratic official who was a tsiba in 1950 and then was appointed a Kashag Secretary (gadrung) when the Council of Ministers (Kashag) left for Yadong in 1950. He later went back to working as a tsiba when the Kashag and Dalai Lama came back to Lhasa in 1951. He was appointed the head of the Shigatse dzong in 1953 and stayed there until 1957. He then became the Governor General of Yadong [Tib. གྲོ་མོ་སྤྱི་རྒྱབ], and while there he became an intermediary between Jenkhentsisum and Lhasa. In this interview, he talks about his jobs in the government and the situation in Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0008_01/H_0008_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1951 what work were you doing?   

**A:**  In 1950, I was the secretary (Tib. ཙིབ) of the Tsikhang which was one of the top offices of the government, like the Kashag and the Yigtsang. The tsiba worked under the tsipön. In 1950, there was a lot of talk in Lhasa about the disturbances in Kham. At that time, the Dalai Lama was here and there was a lot of talk that there would be a revolt in Lhasa in 1-2 days, etc., etc. It was said that it would not be okay if [a revolt] happened and a Large Abbreviated Assembly (Tib. ཙོནདུ་ཧྲགདུ་གྱེཔ) was convened that was attended by delegates of the three great monasteries, and monk and lay government officials. I was among the delegates. In the discussions at the Assembly, it was said, "Now, in Lhasa, there seems to be nothing [happening] overtly, but we don't know what kind of plot is going on covertly. So we cannot bear the responsibility for the safety of the life of the Dalai Lama." The meeting discussed what would be best to do. At the meeting they said, "For the time being, if the Dalai Lama went to India that wouldn't be quite right, so at first it would be good for him to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, which is a Tibetan territory that is near India, to avoid danger." When it was decided for him to leave, the Dalai Lama suddenly appointed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and Lobsang Tashi as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> in his absence, and told them to take responsibility for the time being. For the Kashag, there was Surkhang and Liushar, and it was said that the Kashag should accompany the Dalai Lama. Also, it was said that the 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> would be at risk [if they] stayed and they all went with the Dalai Lama to Yadong saying that they were going to serve the Dalai Lama outside [Lhasa]. They were going with the Dalai Lama, so they appointed substitutes for Lhasa. Because the Kashag went, almost all of the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> below also wanted to go. [laughter] They were saying "If we don't go, we can't bear the danger." Two days before the Dalai Lama was to leave, he appointed as Acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>s (Tib. ཀཙབ), Shenkawa (Shasur) and Thubden Ramyang. And since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> also went to Yadong, I was appointed as the acting [Tib. ལས་ཚབ] gadrung. Before that, since all people were preparing to go, I was also ready to go to Yadong. I was going to leave my things [for safekeeping] in a monastery and go, but then I was appointed as the gadrung so I had no choice but to accept it. That's how I came to stay in Lhasa. The Dalai Lama went on the 13th of the 11th Tibetan month. On that day, the Kashag met in the Potala and the 2 Acting Kalöns gave the orders to us. We passed the order on to the mayor of Lhasa (Tib. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དཔོན] The mayor of Lhasa during the traditional era. The head of the Nangtsesha Office [tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤར].">mipön</a> [མི་དཔོན]) and to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་པ] 1. The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder. 2. The head of the Shölpa leygung.">Shölpa</a> Legung who were in charge of the judiciary, and told them to be on guard with security against disturbances. The people thought that there might be some danger after the Dalai Lama left, but nothing serious happened. We were worried that the Chinese might try to chase after the Dalai Lama, as the Chinese had done in 1910 when the 13th Dalai Lama went to India and Tsarong stopped the Chinese at Jagsam [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ]. We also investigated and inquired whether such things were going to happen or not, but this didn't happen and the Dalai Lama went leisurely to Yadong, not going day and night as he did in 1910. The name of the Kashag left in Lhasa was the Shi (home) Kashag [Tib. གཞིས་བཀའ་ཤག] and the other was called the Che (traveling) Kashag [Tib. བྱེས་བཀའ་ཤག] Kalön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] at this time was in the north at Nagchuka. (Kalön) Ngabö was in Chamdo in Chinese hands and Lhalu had already left there but was yet to arrive in Lhasa. The Kashag sent Lhalu many letters saying, "Don't return. Stay out there temporarily and keep watch on what is going on out there. Do the work that should be done there because Chamdo is lost." But he was trying his best to come up [to Lhasa] so he just stayed a few days at Lharigo. But he didn't want to stay there and ended up staying in Kongpo Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ] for a while and then came on back to Lhasa. Similarly, Ragashag sent the Kashag several letters saying, "Since there was the contradiction [dispute] between Labrang and the Tibetan Government, it seems Labrang is not acting well and they are trying to take advantage of this opportunity to do something to the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama is in Yadong and there are no security troops here, so I can't bear the responsibility of the danger. So for the time being, I am not coming to Lhasa, but I am going via the northern route to Shigatse to keep an eye on things. The Acting Kalön (Katsab) discussed this with Jigyab Khembo Ngawang Thöndrup who was here (in Lhasa) and he said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> will never do this." Especially, he said, "I worked as the Shigatse Dzong head from 1954-57. This will never happen and I have confidence in this and I can guarantee that Tashilhunpo will never do things against the Dalai Lama's life safety. It is just that Ragashag wants to move from Nagchuka so he used that as an excuse." Then the Katsab and the Jigyab Khembo said to him that, "There would not be such a danger", but he had already left. He had already left on his own. Usually, wherever a kalön was, it was called the Kashag. So there were Kashag in Lhasa, in the north and in Lharigo, and we also had to report to Yadong. To sign the 17-Point Agreement with the Chinese, we sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] and Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན] to Chamdo to Ngabö based on the instructions from Yadong. Yadong sent Kheme, Sonam Wangdü [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད་བསོད་ནམས་དབང་འདུས] and Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར] to Beijing [from Yadong].   

**Q:**  Can you tell us about Ngabö sending Gadrung Dumra [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར] from Chamdo to Lhasa?   

**A:**  He sent Gadrung Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What did they say when they were sent to Lhasa?   

**A:**  They told all that happened regarding the fall of Chamdo, like when Ngabö burned the ammunition dump and tried to come up, but couldn't because he was surrounded by the Chinese. They also said, "At present, the Chinese don't appear to be going to continue on to Lhasa. And since it was decided to sign the 17-Point Agreement, Ngabö didn't have a plan to come up." We then wrote a report on what they said and sent it to Yadong. Then an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lama, Shar Kelden Gyatso [Tib. ཤར་སྐལ་ལྡན་རྒྱ་མཚོ], a Chinese and Shalu Sergaw Trülku [Tib. ཞ་ལུ་སེར་ཁོག྄་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] came from the north [Qinghai] and were stopped at Nagchuka. The Governor of Northern Tibet (Changji) was Rasagyagen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན]. He wrote to the Kashag saying that he had stopped them there and asked whether he should send them on to Lhasa or not.   

**Q:**  Chamdo was lost, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The two lamas were sent by the Chinese Communist Party. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> ordered that the 2 lamas should be sent on, but the Chinese person, using gentle explanations, should be kept there. "If you absolutely have to send him on, we will send a liaison officer. You may not send him alone." Then another letter from Nagchu arrived saying that the Chinese man was insisting he come to Lhasa. If we don't let him come, there was a danger he would kill himself. So then we sent the lay official Denchatsang [Tib. ལྡན་བྱ་ཚང] and a Chinese translator for the Kashag. Since the Chinese didn't know the road, they took him over the Gökharla [Tib. རྒོད་མཁར་ལ] Pass and ended up in Samye (in Lhoka, way out of the way) [laughter]. We had given them internal instructions to do that. We told the Liaison officer, "Do not bring them to Lhasa as we aren't sure what kind of plot he might enact if he gets to Lhasa. Pretend to go to Lhasa and take him to Samye." After keeping him there for some days, he said, "This isn't Lhasa." They replied, "This is on the way to Lhasa. Never mind, we will soon reach Lhasa." After that, when some days passed, the Chinese told him, "You have plotted and brought me here." [laughter] At this time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and Thubden Lengmön had left for Chamdo. The Chinese translator was kept for over a month in Samye. Before Ngabö left for Beijing he wrote the Kashag a letter saying that "For the time being, since it was decided to sign the agreement, there isn't a likelihood of war breaking out. So for the time being, the Kashag should adopt a flexible [Tib. སྟབ་བསྟུན་མཁས་པོ] policy, not too soft and not too tough." So we thought that we couldn't leave this Chinese man in Samye, so we brought him to Lhasa. He then met with the Sitsab and Acting Kalön. The essence of what he said was, "Tibet is a part of China, but we won't use force now. The government should propagandize among the people so the people can have their doubts cleared up." At this time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and masses considered the Chinese Communist Party as a thorn in one's eye, although they couldn't say that openly. This was also the same message of the two Lamas who came to propagandize the policy of the Chinese Communist Party in a gentle way, saying that Tibet was a part of the motherland. So the Kashag and sitsab told the lamas and the Chinese that, "If we call a meeting for you to propagandize about Tibet being a part of China, the people will not agree to this. So although you have this task, if you do it openly, it will not be good. We can not guarantee your life safety. You should think about it this way." This was said by the Kashag and the 2 sitsab. Then, Shalu Segaw Trülku was kind of a thoughtful person and he said, "Oh yes, you are right. The Tibetan people have a very strong religious feeling, so if we act hastily it will be bad." So they agreed to leave it. We also told them to do things very carefully and tactfully, so they didn't try to propagandize actively and then the situation was kind of calm. The [communist] revolution was occurring in Xinjiang, so 13 Muslims from Xinjiang fled claiming to be religious personal. They arrived in Nagchuka and they came after camels. They came through the northern route which was a vast, remote place and they were going to India. We received a message from Nagchu saying that these 13 religious leaders had arrived in Nagchu, so should we send them along or not? The Kashag said, "Send them over because they are anti-invasion and will not cause problems in Lhasa." When they arrived in Lhasa with their camels, we gave them a very good reception and sent them to the mosque in Lhasa. They said they had a very difficult time. They carried a lot of gold, which they buried somewhere so that they could take more food. Later after they reached their destination, they wrote letters thanking the Kashag for the help, and they sent a private letter to me also saying that I helped them a lot.   

**Q:**  In Shenkawa's book he wrote about a difference of opinion between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> regarding negotiations. Particularly that the negotiations should be in Lhasa, not Beijing.   

**A:**  Did he write the book?   

**Q:**  Yes. It was not published for many years and last year, or the year before that, it came out.   

**A:**  At this time, the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the 2 kalön discussed important decisions. After a decision was made, Trekhang Thubden Samjola, who was then the Nendrön of the sitsab, and I would come and write the decision in a letter.   

**Q:**  Was he the one who married the Buthanese Tashila?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. Now he is dead, though he is younger than me. We didn't know what they discussed in detail but they would write the conclusions in a letter. But what you say is likely to be true since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was always hard-headed about things and wanted to do things his own way. He was one who really only liked the old customs. He was very insistent on doing things and didn't listen to others' opinions. He also had a very old brain [conservative], and great loyalty and devotion to the Dalai Lama and the government. And he didn't have much foresight or vision, and he was insistent and powerful. This sounds like it was Lukhangwa's idea and then Lobsang Tashi agreed with him as he usually did. [laughter] Then there was a Japanese <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</a> called Kesang Thubden [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཐུབ་བསྟན] who was the Buddhist Association leader . He had studied in the great monasteries and I knew him when I was a child. Later after his studies were completed, he returned to Japan. We used to send letters back and forth a lot. About the time that Chamdo was about to fall I received a letter from him. It said, "The Chinese Communists have decided to invade Tibet. You in Tibet have probably made preparations to block this, but the most important thing to understand is that you cannot win militarily. What you should do is propagandize about the unique Tibetan history abroad. I don't know about Tibetan history, but if you send me information about Tibetan history I can tell people." So I reported this to the 2 Acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>. They said, "If you send a letter answering him that would be good because there are many historical books in Tibetan." During the 43 Tsenbo Tibet was completely independent. As to our relations with China, when we had good relations, we were like relatives, and when we weren't friendly, we fought wars. Sometimes we attacked them, sometimes they attacked us. Then Tibet broke up into parts and the Yuan Dynasty invaded Tibet. During the Sakya and Phagmodrupa [Tib. ཕག་མོ་གྲུབ་པ] eras, they took political responsibility. Basically, Tibet was an independent country. So the 2 Acting Kalön said, "If you send a reply like this it would be good." So then I asked whether we should ask the 2 sitsab. They said, "Don't mention this. If you do, they won't allow you to reply. Because Lukhangwa always says we should not depend on outsiders, but should only depend on ourselves using our own strength, so he will not let you do this". So we, Thubden Dawa [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཟླ་བ], the representatives of the three great monasteries and I, put together a history of Tibet for him. We sent him a very large historical account (the size of a load carried on one's back) (this meant they copied it from different sources, not something written originally). We sent this and told him to spread this information through his religious organization. Because his personality was like this, I am sure that Lukhangwa really said what you mentioned about not going to Beijing, etc. The Dalai Lama was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and the Chinese officials, like Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua, came via the sea route. [it was only Zhang Jingwu]  

**Q:**  Can you tell us about the anti-17-Point Agreement meeting that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> called before the Chinese arrived in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, it was that there was nothing in the 17-Point Agreement. Especially since, in the 17-Point agreement, there was an unclear word called the Common Program [Ch. gong tong gang ling] used repeatedly so this was not acceptable at all. At that time, in the Kashag there were discussions about this, saying that we didn't know what it referred to. We also had arguments over religious policy and nationality policy saying that this was presented as a policy, but it was to deceive people. The communists have no religion so how would there be a religious policy? Formerly, during the Qing Emperors, they had faith in Buddhism, so if they [the Qing] put forth a religious policy we would believe them, but not these atheist communists. In the Dalai Lama's Potala room called Dendenkyil [Tib. བདེ་ལྡན་དཀྱིལ], there is a fresco showing the Qing Emperor becoming a monk, and they have built many monasteries in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and many other places. This was because they really had religious faith. I was 36 years old then. Now I am 78. So the history was like a dream for me. Then there was Yunggön Talama Könchog Jungne [Tib. དབྱིངས་དགོན་ཏ་བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག་འབྱུང་གནས]. He used to be in the Nanjing Office [of the Dalai Lama] [Tib. དོན་གཅོད]. He received a letter from a Chinese monk he knew from Nanjing. This monk said that the Chinese were going to liberate Tibet, and that it was only a matter of time so, "The best strategy is to use peaceful means, not warfare. Tibet has many ancient artifacts so you should move all of them that you can to India now because no one is blocking you from going to India." Talama, who was in Nanjing, then wrote to the Kashag about this. This the Kashag read. There was a lot of discussion and Shenkawa, who had a lot of faith in the Gelugpa sect, was worrying about how they could take the Ganden Monastery's Golden Stupa (of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a>'s remain). When the Kashag reported this to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, they said, "The communist's religious and nationalist policies are meant to fool people. We must think carefully about whether the teachings of Buddhism will remain or not under the communists." In the beginning, the four of them discussed this and made the decision and then they told us it would not be convenient if we announced this right away and we didn't know what the Dalai Lama was thinking. So they didn't announce it openly. I think this was either just before or just after Zhang Jingwu came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  But what about the formal assembly meeting when all the officials signed a pledge? Trindor: I heard that a meeting was held in the Potala where all the officials signed a pledge against the Agreement. This was the time when Ngabö was coming up and the Dalai Lama was about to arrive. I heard Lhalu arrived 2 days after the meeting. It was just after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> Serbang [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྦྲེང].   

**A:**  I don't remember one like this [Note: Shatra told us about one in his interview]. At that time, I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> and I was not among the delegates, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</a> Assembly had about 50 people. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said at the meeting of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, the Katsab, the Nendrön and me, "Only saying that you should recite mantras and going for pilgrimages will not be able to protect Buddhism." But, I don't remember it was told outside of the meeting.   

**Q:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, the officials split into two groups where one group favored the Dalai Lama going to India and the others to return. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>'s position was to return to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the Katsab were for returning to Lhasa. The main one in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> for returning was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> Chömpel Thubden [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ཐུབ་བསྟན]. He was the teacher of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso.   

**Q:**  Who was in favor of going to India?   

**A:**  The main ones for going into exile were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and a few others. Maybe also Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  He was in India and he came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> for a short time.   

**A:**  He was in favor of going to India. Among the monk officials (tsekor [Tib. རྩེ་སྐོར]), I think basically most of them were in favor of the Dalai Lama returning to Lhasa. Also, Talama Rong Namsey Thubden Norsang [Tib. རོང་རྣམ་སྲས་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ནོར་བཟང] was verbally powerful and a little bit thoughtful. I heard that he said that it would not do if the Dalai Lama went to India. In Lhasa, Jigyab Khembo Ngawang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] also insisted on saying that it would not be okay for him to go out. We had a meeting of the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, 2 kalön, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ] The highest monk official in the traditional Tibetan government. He was the head of the monk official segment, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s household and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s private storeroom [tib. dzübug].">Jigyab khembo</a>, and me, and he said, "For the time being, no matter whatever is going to happen, we have to bring the Dalai Lama back. The 17-Point Agreement has been made but whether it will be put into practice through to the end, we don't know yet."   

**Q:**  What was the view of the two tutors?   

**A:**  I know that they wouldn't have thought that the Dalai Lama should go to India. In the Lhasa Kashag meeting with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, the decision was at first, for the time being, to use tactful methods [Tib. ཐབས་མཁས་པོ] and we should pack up the valuable artifacts and things as much as we could, and when all was ready internally, then we should take them to India. I think that at that time, no officials would sincerely say the 17-Point Agreement was good. When Zhang Jingwu came, he didn't get along with the sitsab. Therefore, the two sitsab were told that it would be good to resign. The Sitsab spoke abrasively to the Chinese who got angry and the Sitsab had to resign. At this time, Surkhang had a great loyalty towards the Tibetans and he was smart, tricky, and the most capable among the kalön. Surkhang used to always say, "For the time being, it is important to keep things calm." Surkhang once told the two sitsab openly, "Two sitsab always talk abrasively and always insist that what you say should be done. They shouldn't do that. The 5th Dalai Lama said, 'Confronting face to face by force, it is hard to defeat an enemy. Using clever methods, one can attain one's wishes', i.e., to use militant means at first would not be effective in attaining our goals [Tib. གདོང་གཏུགས་དྲག་པོས་དགྲ་བོ་བརྟུལ་དཀའ་བས། སྣ་ཚོགས་ཐབ་ཀྱིས་འདུན་པ་འདུན་མ་རླབས་ཀྱིས་གཅོད]." [Note: An alternative version of this saying is, "You should defeat the enemy through various different methods [Tib. སྣ་ཚོགས་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་དགྲ་བོ་བརྟུལ་བར་བྱེད"]." Surkhang also said, "If we want to counter attack the Chinese, do we have any means to do that? Now, the Chinese soldiers are continuously arriving, so we shouldn't do this." But, this was the natural character of the sitsab, so they were unable to change it and they had to resign. The main force in the Kashag was Surkhang. Lhalu was an ex-kalön, a kasur. After that, the Kashag and the Chinese didn't have any fierce arguments [Tib. དྲག་འཐབ].   

**Q:**  Did Lhalu become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཟུར] A former or ex-Kalön.">kasur</a> as soon as he arrived in Lhasa?   

**A:**  He stayed in the Kashag for a short time. When he came, the Dalai Lama was yet to come and he stayed with the Katsab. After the Dalai Lama came back to Lhasa, Lhalu remained kalön for a short while and then became kasur. Lhalu was very flexible in speech, and was not abrasive. After the Dalai Lama returned, since the 17-Point Agreement was to be implemented, the Chinese set up the office called the 'Overall in charge of Military Administration' [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ལས་ཁུངས] [the Tibet Work Committee] in Yuthok. It was like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, the Chinese used the religious policy and they went through the motions of giving the monasteries alms and spent many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>. [laughter] So Lukhangwa said that the Chinese giving dayan is like giving children treats.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there an incident with the seating arrangement when the Dalai Lama returned and Zhang Jingwu wanted to sit together, but the Sitsab told him that you have to sit like this?   

**A:**  Yes. There was an argument about this, but it wasn't a big one. There was no custom for sitting the way Zhang Jingwu wanted. Normally, the Dalai Lama would be seated facing downwards and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> would be seated like this. It was since Zhang Jingwu was the representative of the Zhongyang that he should sit like this. After the Dalai Lama came back and all the traveling officials came to Lhasa, my job as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> was also over.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were a lot of arguments and harsh words between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and the Chinese, e.g., he said something about starving? Something like "Hunger is worse than losing the war [Tib. དམག་ཕམ་པ་ལས་གྲོད་ཁོག་ལྟོགས་པ་སྡུག་གི་རེད]." Another way of saying this was, "We did not win the war, but we have to make them die of hunger [Tib. དམག་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་མ་རེད་དེ་ལྟོགས་ཤི་ཐེབས་སུ་འཇུག་དགོས]."   

**A:**  Yes, probably, he might have said that. This was the talk among the masses. But in short, everyone was unhappy with the coming of the Chinese, and of course, the religious personal were like this. Then after resigning from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> post, I switched my job and became the Shigatse Dzongpön. Before I left for Shigatse the Dalai Lama gave me an instruction saying, "You should get along well with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and the most important thing you have to do is make good relations with Tashilhunpo. In the past, the previous Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama didn't get along well. This was caused by the officials beneath them so you must be careful not to let such a thing happen again."   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  It was in 1953, just before the Dalai Lama left for China [Note: then it must be 1954]. While I was in Shigatse, he also said I should maintain good relations with the Chinese and not let bad trouble come about [Tib. ཁ་ཆག་སྣ་རལ].   

**Q:**  How long did you stay as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a>?   

**A:**  For four years, until 1957. Then I was sent to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> as the governor (Tib. ཡདོང་ཇིགྱབ [གྲོ་མོ་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]). I stayed there for 2 years until the revolt and then I was arrested. While I was the Shigatse district head, one of my most important tasks was to propagandize among the people the policy of the Chinese Communist Party and about the 17-Point Agreement. But since the masses didn't like the Chinese, this was very hard to do. At the time, the Dalai Lama was returning from China, so we had to send people for the welcome back reception [Tib. ཕེབས་བསུ]. It would not be okay to send some mediocre people, so we selected and sent Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར], Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག] and several others to Lhasa as representatives of the people. At that time Lhabju was the clerk of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> [Tib. ལས་དྲུང]. After this, we had a lot of trouble. People said that the Shigatse Dzong had a relationship with the People's Association and the representatives we sent established relations with the Khambas after arriving in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Earlier, in 1952, there was a People's Association. Many people were arrested, a petition was sent and Zhang's house was surrounded. What was this?   

**A:**  Yes there was. They submitted a petition. It presented the history from the 5th Dalai Lama until now, and said that there were relations with China, but they had never done with such severe political oppression as this. There were Chinese in Tibet in the past, like the Amban, but bringing and keeping as many soldiers as now, this never happened. So this was the main point of the petition.   

**Q:**  Who were the leaders of this?   

**A:**  Alo Chöndze from Lhasa, and Lhabju and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Khyilma [Tib. དཀྱིལ་མ] from Tsang.   

**Q:**  Weren't there two [Associations]? Was this the one in 1952?   

**A:**  The 1955-56 organization was built on the foundation of the 1952 one. The 1952 organization wasn't completely destroyed and it was the foundation of the later one.   

**Q:**  I heard that the supporters of the 1952 People's Association were the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and that they also had a relationship with Jenkhentsisum.   

**A:**  Yes. The 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> had a relationship with the People's Association. And the 2 sitsab also had relations with the Jenkhentsisum. When I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Jigyab in Phari, I received many documents from Jenkhentsisum. My main crime [later] was that I had received these letters from Jenkhentsisum. I got their handwritten letters and they gave me the responsibility of distributing these. These letters were discovered by the Chinese when I was arrested.   

**Q:**  What were the contents of these letters?   

**A:**  The main point was that we must support <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and that if anything new broke out in Tibet it should send this information to Kalimpong at once.   

**Q:**  Who were the letters sent to? Did they send the letters to the Kashag?   

**A:**  They were sent to reliable people. I had worked with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> for about ten years so I knew him well, and I was also acquainted with Gyalo Thondup as I had done some work with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Taktse family. I also knew Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen [an older brother of the Dalai lama. So I sent these letters on. I did it for the benefit of Buddhism (in Tibet), and this was my main crime. I was in prison from 1959 to 1979. The letters were discovered so there was no hiding it.   

**Q:**  Did you also get printed materials for the distribution at the Mönlam?   

**A:**  Yes. One group was sent through me, but there were others sent directly to Lhasa. My being in Phari was important for redistributing such letters. There were many letters going to Lhasa and from Lhasa to them in Kalimpong. They had given the important tasks to individual people and they might have told the people living in Lhasa to distribute the letters. I don't know how they distributed them in Lhasa but I heard that they were done.   

**Q:**  What was their policy? Did they think that if they could launch a revolt in Tibet, they would get support from foreign countries?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying, "You should not surrender and you should rise up no matter what would happen. Finally, [they said] it is not that we don't have supporters."   

**Q:**  Did they mean that we should depend on India or the U.S.?   

**A:**  Not India. India wasn't dependable. It was America. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, Surkhang, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] went to America before, and Shakabpa's trust of America stems from that time. [Note: the Surkhang who went to America was not Kalön Surkhang, but his brother Rimshi]. Shakabpa sent me a letter telling me not to stay in Tibet, but to come to India. But I wasn't able to go since I had my mother, wife and kids. In their letters, they often wrote, "We aren't just saying this to make you feel comfortable temporarily, but we are confident that we have a reliable backer for the long term future [Tib. འཕྲལ་སེལ་སེམས་བག་སྤྲོ་སྤྲོ་བཤད་པ་མིན། ཕུགས་ཡུལ་རྒྱབ་རྩ་གདེང་འཁྱོལ་བ་ཡོད]."   

**Q:**  Was the Kashag backing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>?   

**A:**  The Kashag pretended not to know about Jenkhentsisum. But, internally, there wasn't any contradiction between the Kashag and Jenkhentsisum. The Kashag was talking with Khambas in a gentle manner [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] and their sending <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> to tell the Khambas not to rebel or fight and to settle down was just for external appearances and was in name only [Tib. ཕྱིའི་བཟོ་ལྟ].   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was making war, so did you think that the Americans would really support them?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But, actually, they didn't give support, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I know our government [USA] talks a lot, but it is difficult to send soldiers.   

**A:**  You are right. It is difficult.   

**Q:**  But, at that time, did you think the U.S. would send soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes. We thought that they would send soldiers. Especially we thought that they would do so after the revolt broke out in 1959. [People said] "In Pembar foreign planes dropped us guns. This is only a part of the help we will get and they will support us similarly. Therefore, it isn't that the foreigners didn't help or that we couldn't see." There was a lot of talk like this.   

**Q:**  In 1951, the U.S. sent a letter to the Dalai Lama through Gyalo Thondup or Gusung Depön telling him to come abroad, did you know about this?   

**A:**  No. I didn't hear anything about this. Major issues were kept secret by those at the very top. I knew the decisions the Kashag finalized, but not their discussions.   

