# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0008.04  
##  : with Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chabtsom [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ] was a lay aristocratic official who was a tsiba in 1950 and then was appointed a Kashag Secretary (gadrung) when the Council of Ministers (Kashag) left for Yadong in 1950. He later went back to working as a tsiba when the Kashag and Dalai Lama came back to Lhasa in 1951. He was appointed the head of the Shigatse dzong in 1953 and stayed there until 1957. He then became the Governor General of Yadong [Tib. གྲོ་མོ་སྤྱི་རྒྱབ] and while there he became an intermediary between Jenkhentsisum and Lhasa. In this interview, he talks about the 1950-51 period, the reforms, and also the dispute with Labrang [the Panchen Lama's administrative unit] over the "people's representative" named Bisu.   

---  
### Tape 4  

---

**Q:**  After the signing of the Agreement, did the Kashag have disagreements over several points? For example, the problem over the Military-Administrative Committee. Can you speak about this?   

**A:**  The Kashag had gone [to <a href "#" data-tooltip "[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>=in=1950] and I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>. The Acting Kashag Ministers were Shenkawa and Thubden Ramyang. My mother had gone to India. I thought I should go to Yadong too, but I couldn't. Zhang Jingwu came by sea to Tibet. The liaison officer for him was Shölkang Jedrungla. The Phari <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> head was Shölkang Targyela. The other gadrung was Samjola. We knew the Agreement had been signed, but we didn't know each point. At this time if there was a serious issue, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> jointly discussed and settled it. So the four of them discussed the signing of the Agreement and said it wasn't good, but we had no choice but to accept it so temporarily there would be no warfare.   

**Q:**  How did you first hear of the Agreement, by radio?   

**A:**  Two signers--Künsangtse and another--went to India and then via sea. From Lhasa, we sent Thubden Lengmön and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Tenzin Thondrub. Ngabö went from Chamdo. The Kashag had ordered Lhalu to stay in Chamdo, but he didn't listen and slowly came back to Lhasa. The Kashag feared that after taking Chamdo, the Chinese would continue to attack. The Kashag had made preparations to try to stop them if they did. They probably could not have [stopped them], but they made preparations. [kalön] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> was stationed in Northern Tibet. If the Chinese came via the north, he was to block them. Before the signing, but after the delegates left [for Beijing], he sent a letter to the Lhasa Kashag saying that "If I stay in Nagchuka, since the Dalai Lama has gone to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and since the Tibetan government and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> aren't friendly, there was no telling what Tashilhunpo might do to the Dalai Lama while he was in Yadong. So I thought that the Dalai Lama was in danger and I went to Yadong." So from Nagchuka he went to Shigatse. Really he was afraid the Chinese would attack him in Nagchuka and he would lose. I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> and read his letters. The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> in Lhasa thought that though the relations between the Tibetan government and Labrang wasn't good, the people of Tashilhunpo would never do anything to harm the Dalai Lama's life, but if he wanted to go there, there was nothing to do since he was a Kashag minister [kalön].   

**Q:**  How many soldiers did he have?   

**A:**  He had 3 battalions; a little less than 2,000 troops. He was afraid to fight so he stayed in Shigatse. We heard about the signing of the Agreement from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Kashag. They sent us a message. The message said the Agreement had been made. For a while in Lhasa we didn't let rumors spread and kept things calm. Then we had two lamas try to come from Nagchuka. One lama's name was Shar Ganden Gyatso. The other was Shalu Segaw Lama. There was a Chinese man with them. They said at Nagchuka that they had come to discuss things. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> head there was Rasa Gyagen (Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན), and he sent us a letter asking whether he should send them along to Lhasa or not. The Kashag said, "For a while deceive them and don't let them come to Lhasa." The Kashag sent a liaison officer and he took the Chinese [official] to Lhoka pretending it was to Lhasa. We sent a detailed report of this to Yadong. The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> decided this. The lamas were allowed to come into Lhasa, but the Chinese [official] was left in Tsetang. The Lamas had come to publicize the communist's good religious and nationality policies. At this time some suspicious information reached the Kashag in Lhasa. In Beijing, there was a Yunggun <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>. He had a disciple/student called Tsidrung Sonam Targye. Yunggun dzasa and Thubden Ramyang were close friends. I also was friendly with him. He sent the Kashag a letter in which he said, "The communist's military forces have left for Tibet. This came soon after the loss of Chamdo. You should not fight. If you fight, you will lose and monasteries will be destroyed." He detailed which statues were destroyed, etc. "You cannot compete against the Chinese Communist Party." Yunggun dzasa said, "I wasn't born in Tibet and did not grow up there, but I believe in religion and have great sympathy for Tibet. I don't know who the main officials are in Tibet now but please give this letter to the Dalai Lama." There were several books with the letter. He told about how the Chinese Communist Party destroyed monasteries and warned them not to let this happen in Tibet. He said that the best thing to do was to hold discussions peacefully. I took this letter very seriously. [He also wrote] "The four great monasteries should move all their valuable things and statues, etc., to India. Now the road is open so you can move these." I considered that this was his real deepest thoughts. The letter said that "Whether [or not] you give this to higher officials you must think and decide about this." So I worried a lot. The letter was in Tibetan. Then when I took Yunggun dzasa's letter to Thubden Ramyang, he said, "This is important so I must tell Shasur." I don't know if they told the sitsab. Shasur was very religious and was worried aboaut how we could transport the Ganden Sidung (The tomb of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a> at Ganden Monastery). It was too heavy to move yet how could they leave it? So because we heard this I thought that if the communists came to Tibet it would not be good for us. When Zhang Jingwu came, the Kashag met him at Gyetseluding to welcome him. I thought that their religion, nationality and united front policies were good, but I thought this was just a temporary strategy to deceive us. There was no talk about the Agreement at this time. Just talk about whether you had a hard journey, etc. Zhang Jingwu stayed at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> House at first. The katsab and sitsab held a discussion about the Agreement. Two things came out of this. One was that if they started the Military-Administrative Committee, that would be no good. The other was that we needed an explanation about what gungdung gangling (Tib. སྤྱི་མཉམ་རྩ་འཛིན) [the Common Program] meant. We thought this was some kind of secret talk. They decided that if the katsab met Zhang and the Agreement came up, they would talk about this, and if the sitsab met him they would say these two points. The Kashag ministers from Yadong hadn't come back yet.   

**Q:**  Did you have a copy of the Agreement?   

**A:**  Zhang Jingwu gave us 4 copies. The first meeting with Zhang was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> in the Zhöl simjung. At this meeting Zhang gave a speech. He said the Agreement was signed by the delegates with complete power and listed each of them by name. We didn't force them. We met many times and discussed back and forth and then decided on it. This was very good. At this meeting we did not argue. The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> were there. No argument occurred at this meeting. We gave him a dinner at the Trungji Linga's cottage. There was no talk about whether the Agreement was acceptable or not or anything like this. We were worried about the Military-Administrative Committee, but Zhang Jingwu said we had to establish the Military-Administrative Committee, but he [actually] didn't try to implement it. Then in August, the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa. Then the real Council Ministers [Tib. kalön] came [back from <a href "#" data-tooltip "[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>] and the real Gadrung Dumra came. I was the acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>. After Dumra returned, he did the gadrung work and I returned to do the tsiba work in the Tsikhang. The katsab [acting kalön] stayed and met together with the Kashag Ministers. I put together a package of all the Kashag's letters, etc. from when the Dalai Lama left until he returned, and then I turned them over. After that I had nothing to do with the Kashag. After the Yadong Kashag returned, the Kashag's opposition to the Military-Administrative Committee and their questions about gungdung gangling increased. These issues all occurred before the Full Assembly meeting. After Ngabö returned, there was an Abbreviated Assembly meeting with about 60 government officials and some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> abbots and officials. I was a delegate to it. Ngabö gave a speech explaining in detail the events and circumstances surrounding the Agreement.   

**Q:**  Did anyone say the agreement was no good at that meeting?   

**A:**  I don't recall any. The 60 or so delegates to the Assembly, in their hearts, pretty much didn't like the Agreement, but at the meeting no one opposed it. The meeting was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>'s Shabden lhagang. At first only we three knew of Yunggon <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>'s letter, but afterwards everyone did, and people said the Agreement wasn't worth anything since the Chinese wouldn't honor it in the future. We took his comment telling us to move the precious things out of Lhasa to mean that when the Chinese get complete power, they will destroy the monasteries. So everyone was negative about the future and didn't trust the Chinese. We thought 'Whatever happens, it will not be good for us.' Yunggun dzasa's comment was passed among the government officials by word of mouth but wasn't mentioned at the meeting. After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Kashag returned, Zhang Jingwu discussed setting up the Military-Administrative Committee. The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> opposed this vehemently. Because of this, the two sitsab were eliminated.   

**Q:**  Before the Dalai Lama returned, I heard that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and Zhang had arguments. You said not at the first meetings, but maybe at the subsequent ones. The Chinese had no grain and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, "It's better to lose the war than be hungry." Did he say that?   

**A:**  If there were any serious issues before the Dalai Lama returned, the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> and 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> would discuss them and I would have certainly known. I can say clearly that while I was there, there were no such fights occurred. There was a problem about the grain supply. This occurred soon after the Dalai Lama returned from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, but I wasn't the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> then. There was not enough grain to give the Tibetan army troops grain as salary so how could we give enough grain if many People's Liberation Army troops came? Zhang Guohua had come to Tibet and wanted Tibet to sell grain, and this was very hard to do. There were many arguments over this. The government had a Salary Office, which was an office that paid soldier's salaries. But it wasn't even able to pay the Tibetan soldiers. After the Dalai Lama returned, this issue and the start of the Military-Administrative Committee were hot issues that caused fights. The sitsab opposed the Military-Administrative Committee because the name "mag" implied it wouild be in charge of all soldiers. For example, it included converting the Tibetan army into the People's Liberation Army. And "si" implied the power of the Dalai Lama, sitsab and Kashag, and meant the Chinese were going to steal the power from these. So they said we could not institute the Military-Administrative Committee. They thought that if the Military-Administrative Committee was started, the Dalai Lama would lose his authority and power, so we were opposed to it. At this time Zhang Jingwu publicized the points of the Agreement a lot, but the Tibetan government was adamant against the Military-Administrative Committee.   

**Q:**  What was Zhang Jingwu's attitude then?   

**A:**  He was said to be someone who got angry quickly, but when we met and ate together, he showed a very good attitude. He would laugh and talk with us, etc. So there was talk in the government circles that it was best to try and work peacefully with him. This talk occurred in 1954-55.   

**Q:**  How did the People's Association (mimang tshogpa) [function]?   

**A:**  It was Gamika Chöndze and people like him. The Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> head was Muja and he and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> had fights. So in 1952 I was sent there as head of the dzong to replace Muja who was sent to be the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Jigyab.   

**Q:**  What were the fights between Muja <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and Labrang about?   

**A:**  One was over the misers. A second was over collecting taxes.   

**Q:**  While you were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>, it is said you wrote a letter asking for the postponement of reforms. To whom did you send it?   

**A:**  At that time I was the head of Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. The Chinese started a Shigatse Bureau Office and they were saying all of the time that we had to start democratic reforms. Labrang was saying the same thing. So I didn't say anything about whether this is good or bad. I kept quiet. Then when the Dalai Lama was returning from China [in 1955] we had to send some representatives from Shigatse for the welcoming group. I sent Bisu, Lhabju, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> as the people's representatives from Shigatse for the welcoming group. They went with Alo Chöndze. The Shigatse dzong heads sent a letter to the Kashag saying, "We don't understand the reasons for democratic reforms which are deep. All the people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> don't understand. Do not start the reforms until the people understand. If the people understand then it's okay, but postpone it for a while now. In Lhasa, it was revised and sent to the Kashag. The letter was meant to go to the Dalai Lama through the Kashag. And it did. Later when I was in jail this letter caused me a lot of trouble. A second trouble was that the letters from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> went through me. Jenkhentsisum and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had relations. I was called a running dog of Jenkhentsisum. So I was in jail for 20 years. From 1959-79.  

**Q:**  When you were in Shigatse did any disputes arise?   

**A:**  No. None. I have relatives among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> aristocrats and had gone to school there as a kid. If anything began to arise, I would go to my relatives and friends and discuss it and settle it. There was one trouble though. When Bisu went to Lhasa, he said he was the representative of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>. So when Bisu returned to Shigatse, Labrang protested this saying he didn't represent all of Tsang since he didn't represent us. Labrang had many misers and Bisu didn't represent them. At this time Labrang tried to seize Bisu and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Kyipa. We heard of this and then kept them in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> for protection.   

**Q:**  Did Bisu volunteer to go to Lhasa or did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> send him?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> sent him.   

**Q:**  Did you send him after Lhasa sent a message saying send a representative, or did you do it on your own?   

**A:**  There was no message, but we thought there should be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> representatives in the Dalai Lama's welcoming committee.   

**Q:**  Was there an order for a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> representative from the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the petition of the People's Association?   

**A:**  I left for Shigatse in late 1951 so I don't know much.   

**Q:**  Did you send letters to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. Often.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese were in Phari?   

**A:**  I think about 200-300. They were soldiers. They had power to stop foreign people coming from abroad. They didn't interfere with Tibetans going either way.   

**Q:**  When you were at Phari did Nehru come?   

**A:**  No. He went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> on the way to Bhutan. Surkhang came specifically to meet him with a Chinese official.   

**Q:**  What did you think when you first established relations with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>? Did you think it was dangerous, etc.?   

**A:**  They sent me a letter that said you should publicize among the misers opposition against the Chinese communists. My work colleague was Thubden Sangye. But the letter was secret and he didn't know about it. Phari was a key location. I thought that I should try to help them as much as I could. At this time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> had an excellent relationship.   

**Q:**  Did you hear that the U.S. had helped train people and dropped them back into Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes. I didn't know who specifically, but I had heard it. Many spies came through Phari. I used to help them going both ways. When I was in Shigatse as head of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, I used to go to Sakya often. The letters I sent on for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> no one else knew about. The reason for going to Sakya was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. སྒྲོལ་མ, 2. གྲོ་མ] 1. The goddess Tara. 2. A woman&#x27;s name. 3. A wild sweet potato.">Droma</a> Phodrang [one of the Sakya ruling families] was my mother's brother. I also did some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> work on the side. I used to write Gyalo Thondup about what was going on in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did you hear about the Pembar uprising?   

**A:**  Yes. It was after the uprising in Lhasa. The head of it, Dündül (Chöying) [H.0005] is here. He is in the Political Consultative Conference.   

