# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0008.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Chabtsom, Chime Gyebo [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ་འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Chabtsom [Tib. ཆབ་ཚོམ] was a lay aristocratic official who was a tsiba in 1950 and then was appointed a Kashag Secretary (gadrung) when the Council of Ministers (Kashag) left for Yadong in 1950. He later went back to working as a tsiba when the Kashag and Dalai Lama came back to Lhasa in 1951. He was appointed the head of the Shigatse dzong in 1953 and stayed there until 1957. He then became the Governor General of Yadong [Tib. གྲོ་མོ་སྤྱི་རྒྱབ] and while there he became an intermediary between Jenkhentsisum and Lhasa. In this interview, he talks about Jenkhentsisum's letters and why he didn't flee to India in 1959. He also talks about propaganda to start reforms in Shigatse, an incident in Shigatse where a student was beaten and about lords on some estates whipping their servants who said they wanted to go to school. Additionally, he discusses going with Surkhang to Sikkim to meet Prime Minister Nehru, the Tibetan People's Association, and how he went to the 13th Dalai Lama's English School in Gyantse.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0008_03/H_0008_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When you received letters from India, did you have to send them on to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Sometimes, I had to send them to Lhasa. In Lhasa, they sent their letters to Traya Chungtsang Chandzö [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་ཆུང་ཚང]. He probably had a relationship with Shakabpa. He didn't have much to do with the Chushigandu, but he would send information on the situations in Kham to Jenkhentsisum. Then Alo Chöndze was another one to whom they sent letters. I heard he went to India.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard that he [Alo Chöndze] got beaten by the Women's Association in Dharamsala and he died in Australia because of that beating.   

**A:**  He was one of the main people in the People's Association.   

**Q:**  When the revolt took place, how did they arrest you?   

**A:**  I was arrested in Phari. I was staying in Phari and I didn't openly join the revolt. The letters I got from the Welfare Association [in India] (Dedön Tshogpa) and Jenkhentsisum were passed on (by me), but these were secret so I didn't think the Chinese Communist Party would find out and I didn't join the revolt openly.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have the thought of fleeing because the revolt took place?   

**A:**  In the beginning, I had that thought, but I had a wife, children and my mother in Lhasa. So I stayed thinking there wouldn't be much of a problem because I didn't join the revolt openly. But the Chinese investigated thoroughly and many people told the Chinese that I was involved with Jenkhentsisum, so I was caught. If I had run away, it would have been just a short time to get there (in India).   

**Q:**  When you were in Phari, did the Chushigandru people going back and forth say anything about their U.S. backing?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. In their letters, they said there was no question about their having support from foreign governments and they used the weapons drop in Pembar as their proof. We were telling them, "You have to put this into action. In the past, for example, Shakabpa, Surkhang, and Pandatsang went to America, and now the situation in Tibet has become like this. So I can't say with confidence that we will get real support because we have never been there." Then they said there was no problem.   

**Q:**  When you were the Shigatse Dzong head, did you have any cases of misers wanting land reforms? Or cases between a lord [Tib. དཔོན] and his miser?   

**A:**  No. There wasn't any event where the masses said that they wanted the reforms soon. Some poor households who didn't have food to eat probably hoped for this, but most households were not that badly off and I didn't think this was [the case]. After the Shigatse General Administration Office [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ Ch. ban shi qu] of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, they were planning to propagandize everywhere that the reforms were good for all and would begin soon. Some people told me that it might be good to contact the misers before they did their propaganda and tell them what was going to happen. But I said, "This isn't needed and nothing will happen." If they did that, we couldn't keep it a secret and it would not be good if they heard that the dzong head told the misers about this. So the Youth League had a lot of propaganda saying that the reforms would be implemented soon. But afterwards, no one asked for the land reforms and said bad things. Later, Bisu and the representative of the people said that in Lhasa there was tremendous propaganda in favor of it, but not one miser had supported reforms. If even one village had asked for the reforms, the Chinese would always make a big deal about it.   

**Q:**  Did Tashilhunpo do trial reforms?   

**A:**  While I was the head of the dzong they didn't. Afterwards, I don't know.   

**Q:**  What about the incident in Gyantse where the student was beaten by his lord [Tib. དཔོན] when he was called to work as a corvée tax (ula)?   

**A:**  He was called Pöngen Chogdrub. He beat the student.   

**Q:**  Why did he beat him?   

**A:**  Pöngen was a big servant of the Phünkang family and the student was his servant. The student told Pöngen, "I am not going to work as a servant because I am going to school so I can have a [good] future." Then Pöngen told him, "You eat from the Tibetans and you are going to the Chinese school, right?"   

**Q:**  Was he a kind of a nangsen?   

**A:**  Yes. This became a big issue and Pöngen Chogdrub was arrested and kept in Shigatse Dzong. There was much talk about this, saying that he stopped the revolution. This was publicized everywhere. There were other incidents like this that the Chinese didn't learn about. There were also similar things among the servants of the lords where they showed negative attitudes to the lords, and therefore some of them were whipped and imprisoned. But there were also some [lords who] when a servant came and said that they were going to the school, they said, "Fine, go ahead. Your future is important to you." At that time and in the past, the lords had many misers and they were not allowed do anything without asking their lord [Tib. དཔོན་ཁུངས]. But, later they didn't tell the lord and just sent their children to school. When I was the head of the dzong, 3 or 4 of my personal servants told me that they were going to school. I told them, "It's okay, you can go to the school. This is beneficial for your future." So some of these kids are now cadres and they are helpful to me. (laughter)   

**Q:**  When the 17-Point Agreement was signed in 1951, it was okay. But after 8 years the revolt took place and many people were killed. When you look back, do you think that if you had done this or that, the revolt wouldn't have taken place?   

**A:**  The cause of the revolt mainly was that from 1951 the political situation in Tibet got more and more tense. The Chinese central government sent more and more staff and people into Tibet, so the Tibetan government thought that the situation would get uncontrollable if more and more Chinese kept on accumulating there. I wasn't a high official, but underneath [among lower officials] there was talk like this, and people were saying that whatever we did wouldn't help. For example, while I was the Phari Dzong head, probably, in 1958, Nehru was going to visit Sikkim via Yadong when the Sikkim became independent. Surkhang Wangchen Gelek [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] and Tan Guansan went to Sikkim to greet him at a reception while in Tibet because we were neighboring countries. At this time, I went with Surkhang. He said then, "Now we are trying to do our best to calm the situation, but if the situation continues like this, I am worried about what will happen." Then Surkhang went to Shigatse via Gyantse and I stayed in Phari. He gave a lot of speeches in Shigatse. Surkhang also said, "Whatever we do, it will not be good in the future and the Kham disturbance is getting so tense." But, he didn't say that we should launch the revolt.   

**Q:**  Some in the West think that the Khambas came from the east to Tibet and the Tibetans didn't like them very much. They had the guns and they also hated the Chinese anad some think that if the Khambas hadn't come to Tibet, the revolt might not have happened and the reforms would have been postponed and it would be much different. The main thing was the result of the Khamba's trouble. What do you think?   

**A:**  The Chinese Communists' main aim was to do the reforms. They were not saying that they were going to do development based on the feudal system. For them it was not okay if they didn't do the reforms. If they started the reforms, then it was definite that the government, the four great monasteries and the lords (ngadag) would not like it. (laughter) So they [Tibetan government] didn't volunteer to do reforms. When the representatives of the People's Association submitted the petition to the Tibet Autonomous Region, in it was written, "The so-called reforms have a very deep meaning that it doesn't have a bottom on what should be reformed. Until the masses are awakened from ignorance, please postpone the reforms [Tib. དམངས་གཙོའི་བཅོས་སྒུར་ཞེས་པ་སྒྱུར་བྱའི་དོན་གནད་གཏིང་མཐའ་མི་མངོན་པས་སྔ་འཕོས་མི་དམངས་གོ་རྟོགས་སད་སད་བར་དུ]." Actually, they just used the masses as an excuse and it was not a matter of the masses awakening, but actually the lords should awaken. The real reason was that the government, the 4 great monasteries and the lords didn't agree to it. (laughter) Some say, "There is nothing so deep that you can't see the bottom of it. If the lords would get down from their [high] positions, the government would arrange your livelihood, that's it." At that time, it was difficult to do the reforms in an amicable way unless it was done through military means. I was only a small (aristocratic) lord (Tib. ངདག) with an estate and miser. Compared to the big lords like Shatra, I was small like their servant's servant. At all the Assembly meetings that I attended, the kudrak always opposed the reforms. The three great monasteries were powerful and they were against this also. When I was a tsiba, there was a plan to start an English school. Also during the 13th Dalai Lama's time, students were sent to study abroad. I went to an English School in Janglo [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ] in Gyantse. It was imposed on the aristocratic families like a tax and except for the one child who served as the government official, the other children were not allowed to stay home. At that time, all people were saying that if the children were sent to the Janglo School, it would be terrible. While I was there for some time, my mother was afraid and wrote me that she was sick and I should return home. They sought support from the Gyantse Trade Mission and withdrew me from the school. Surkhang Rimshi and I both left at the same time. The 13th Dalai Lama was always saying, "It would not be good if we don't reform politics, we should not always stay and say 'the old and good system' [Tib. སྔ་སྲོལ་བཟང་པོ]." And he also sent students abroad and he sowed the seeds of that. Later, after his death, Reting and Taktra started an English School in Trungji Linga. I was the tsiba then. We sent monk official students (Tib. ཙིདྲུགཔ) to the school. There were about 35 monk and lay officials. The idea was that when the students were okay, we would then send them abroad. It was elaborate. Sawang Bönshö [Tib. བོན་ཤོད] and Tempa Jayang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] were in charge. The rich kudraks, like Tsarong, sent their children to India, and the lower level kudrak would go to our school. The idea of a school was the 13th Dalai Lama's. However, after awhile, the monks came and said, "Why have you started such a school?" The teachers were afraid for their lives. The Revenue Office (Tib. ཙིཁང) was in charge of the school. There are still some of those students left. At that time I was in my 20s, and some other staff members of the tsikhang and I also went there and studied as much as we could. The three great monasteries wanted to end it completely. And they were powerful. They didn't listen to us at all. At that time, at the meetings we told them, "You have to look at the world now, the world is changing. You have to change. You are just wearing your gown on your head and holding your bowl in your hand. You shouldn't do this. Look to the future, this will not harm the religion and politics. If you don't allow the school, you won't be able to stand on your own." But they insisted and wouldn't listen and would talk about the deities and the lamas. We had meetings and tried to convince them but they refused and the school was closed. Had it been left open, it would have improved and been excellent.   

**Q:**  When the Khambas came to Central Tibet, could the government have taken away their arms and stopped them?   

**A:**  At this time [1950], the government had soldiers on guard in the north, but withdrew them since they thought that the Chinese would come from the east. Their arms were kept in Shang Ganden Chöngor monastery. All of the people knew that there were weapons there, but there were no soldiers protecting them. At that time, if I was working in the Kashag, I would have known something about this, but I wasn't. So anyway, Andru Gombo Tashi went there and took the arms. I don't know whether they really took it or if they were in cohoots with the government. Anyway, the Chinese thought the latter. I don't have any proof that they were in cohoots. My estate is located near Ganden Chöngor. It was said outside that it was not right for the government to give the guns to the Khambas openly because the government sent Namseling to try and convince the Khambas not to fight. But, internally it was said widely they were in cohoots.   

**Q:**  If the Kashag had been enthusiastic to stop the Khambas, could they have stopped them?   

**A:**  It would have been hard to stop the Khambas if they really wanted to stop them because there were many Chushigandru in Kham, Kalimpong, Yadong and Phari. These places were filled with Khambas. So leave aside the revolt, it would have caused a very severe internal disturbance if they tried to stop them.   

