# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, OH, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 2010  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He subsequently became a translator and cadre and later a researcher/author in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. The interviewee discusses in detail the revolts in Litang, and then the series of democratic reforms that followed. He also talks about the policies and conflcits between Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, Zhou Enlai, Li Weihan, Li Jingquan and Hu Yaobang.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_08/H_0060_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  This is possible.   

**Q:**  Maybe it happened twice; one was inside and one was outside. Most of them went outside and Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན] and several people stayed inside and fought a battle with the PLA. Yönrupön was killed and others were arrested. Probably, the monastery was destroyed after that, when there were no people in there. When there were people in there, many Khambas said [that they bombed outside]. When there were no people in there, Litang Monastery was destroyed, right?   

**A:**  Whom did they tell to surrender? Who told them to surrender? This is the problem. The Khambas said that the PLA told the people inside the Litang Monastery, "Now we are not going to bomb the monastery, but we are going to bomb outside, so you should surrender and if you don't surrender, then we will bomb inside the monastery."   

**Q:**  Litang and Batang are different. When the new PLA came, they [Khambas] didn't go to the mountains and went into the monastery and closed the door and didn't fight the battle for a long time and dug tunnels [Tib. ས་དོང] and did a lot of work. What happened after they bombed Batang? Did all the people go to the mountains? Did they start the democratic reforms?   

**A:**  After the Fourth Regiment of the Public Security [Ch. gong an si tuan] came, all the rebels ran away. At that time, many people didn't die and after the rebels left, they bombed the monastery and I don't know what was the misunderstanding between them. I saw with my own eyes, that they bombed Ba, and about bombing Litang, [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Did they destroy the whole monastery in Litang?   

**A:**  They had destroyed the assembly hall and several main parts of the monastery. This was not destroyed with cannons; it was indeed bombed. If it was shelled with cannons it will be destroyed from the side (Tib. ཏྲེ [འཕྲེད]), but it was bombed from above.   

**Q:**  When the soldiers came to Batang, the Khambas went to the mountains and then what happened?   

**A:**  I do not know. The democratic reforms started after 1-2 months and they then set up the PCTAR at the end of April. At that time, I heard from the news that Chen Yi came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you hear that news when you were in Batang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you do then?   

**A:**  I came back to Chengdu along with the soldiers. It took two months for my two weeks vacation.   

**Q:**  Which soldiers did you come with?   

**A:**  I came with the Fourth Regiment of the Public Security. At that time, the PLA were going back and forth. I came up with the Work Team and came back with the soldiers.   

**Q:**  Was there any danger on the way back?   

**A:**  No, because I was with the soldiers. There were only about several tens of soldiers and they told me that they had work in Chengdu.   

**Q:**  After the disturbance (Tib. སིངཆ [ཟིང་ཆ]) took place, didn't you people meet the Khambas on your way?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How do you spell Baku Lama?   

**A:**  It must be [Tib. བར་སྐོར་བླ་མ] and I don't know if it is correct or not. I don't know his real name. I met him in Lhasa later on.   

**Q:**  Did you ever hear about Lide Ngari Shingkham [Tib. ལི་སྡེ་མངའ་རི་ཞིང་ཁམ]? Baku Lama had started a kind of government in Batang long ago, saying that in the past, there was a Ngari Shingkham and now we must start a new Ngari Shingkham. This was a former name of the Baligyesum [Tib. 'ba li rgyal gsum]. Ngari Shingkham includes Litang and Batang and you call it Baligyesum. Is Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང] included in this?   

**A:**  Yes, Chantreng is a county and it is included in Baligyesum and it is regarded as a place in Ba because Chantreng is small. Baligyesum includes all the places between Ba and Litang which includes Chantreng and Drango [Tib. བྲག་འགོ] and Dawu [Tib. རྟའུ] which is called Daotreng [Ch. dao cheng] in Chinese. But it is a different matter whether these places adhere to the order [Tib. [བཀོད་པ་འགྲོ] or not. I have never heard of Ngari Shingkham.   

**Q:**  After you returned to Chengdu, what work did you do?   

**A:**  Right after I arrived at Chengdu, I was called to Beijing to work when they set up the Translation Bureau [Tib. ཡིག་སྒྱུར་ཁང] and I handed over the things in the office and I left in September. At that time, the railway was not good, so I went in a ship via Chongqing and Wuhan to Beijing like going for a tour and I had my younger brother with me. When I arrived there, it was already September and at that time, they were holding the 8th Party's Congress [Tib. ཏང་གི་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་བརྒྱད་པ] and I was called to be the interpreter. But when I got there, the meeting was finished and Phünwang La [Tib. ཕུན་དབང་ལགས] was in Beijing. So he purposely called me and he asked me about the revolt in Kham. Phünwang La went to Lhasa as the interpreter for Chen Yi and he was appointed as the Vice Secretary General [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ་གཞོན་པ] while the Secretary General was Ngabö. Although his rank was very high, he was not given a job in Tibet and was sent back to Beijing. At that time, the TAR and the United Front Bureau didn't accept what Chen Yi himself said. Phünwang La was saying the Chen Yi told him to go to Kham to investigate about the revolt and he sent him a jeep to go to Dartsedo and Ganzi. At that time, there was no motor road to Ba, so he went on horseback and then he reported to the Sichuan Province. Anyway, I met him in Beijing. At that time, he was high ranking [Tib. ཆེན་པོ] and I was just a child, but he called me specially by sending a message because there was no phone then. I reported to him all the things that I had seen. He said, "It was wrong to do like that. They didn't do it well, and this made a good thing become bad. [Ch. hao shi bian huai le][Tib. ལས་ཀ་ཡགཔོ་དེ་སྡུག་ཅག་ཆགས་བཞག]. Phünwang La was very attentive of Ba and asked me, "How did they destroy the Ba Chöde and Litang Monasteries?" Later, I heard that the PLA plane even reached Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས]. Then the Dalai Lama told his comments (Tib. སམཆར [བསམ་འཆར]) and asked how it happened. Phünwang La told me that Chen Yi sent a letter to the the Central Committee saying that the air force must not pass the Yangtze River and it would be best if they did not attack Kham with bombs. Later I saw the document when I was told to write the biography of Tan Guansuan. At that time, I met with about 70-80 military officers. When I saw the documents, I found it was true that Chen Yi had sent a letter to the Zhongyang Military Committee [Ch. jun wei] saying "there is no need to use planes because there is lot of criticism about this." Phünwang told me this in 1956. I think that what Phünwang said about Chen Yi telling him to go investigate the democratic reforms was not a lie, but the TAR is not accepting this because there was a contradiction between the TAR and Phünwang. The TAR was saying that Phünwang went for a vacation. If he was going for the vacation, how could he go to Ganzi instead of going to Ba. Phünwang and I were from the same homeland. It was my first time talking with him because he was a high leader and he also had a little bit of an imposing attitude [Tib. ཉམས] of being a leader which was one of reason the masses commented on him. Before that, I hadn't met him in Beijing.   

**Q:**  After the revolt took place, the government sent Liu Geping to Kham, right? Please tell us something about this.   

**A:**  Liu Geping himself sent me a telegraph and called me. This is a sign that they were very attentive [to doing their work] and that they regarded me highly and called me to Beijing to work. At that time, I was a PLA soldier. In November and December [1955], they held a meeting in Kham at which Jagö Tomden and those people were held in Chengdu. The revolt took place in Kham and destroyed the place and some people fled and the disturbance also took place in Lhasa. When Chen Yi came to Lhasa, different things happened and probably the Panchen's Nangmagang was saying that the reforms must be implemented and the Dalai Lama and those people were slightly afraid in 1956. At that time, I didn't know the details, but Phünwang told me frequently in the Ba dialect that he heard that there was a lot of trouble in Kham when they did the reforms. In June in 1956, when they held the third session of the National People's Congress, I was called interpreting, but I couldn't catch up. At that time, there were two meetings: in September [1956], they held the Ninth Party Congress and Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་སྟོབས་ལྡན], Jayang Palmo [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཔལ་མོ], and Pelgön Trinley [Tib. དཔལ་མགོན་འཕྲིན་ལས] came to the meeting as representatives of [Eastern] Tibet. From Tibet, I heard only Ngabö came. They met Premier Zhou and then they became aggressive [Tib. ངར] and told the Central Committee, "we couldn't meet Li Jingquan in Chengdu, but when we arrived in Beijing, we were treated as humans. However, in Chengdu, we were prisoners." Jayang Palmo cried in front of Premier Zhou and her son called Oga, who was my schoolmate in the Institute of Nationalities, went for a vacation in 1955 when he heard that his mother was coming to the meeting. When he arrived in Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], he was arrested saying that he is a rebel [Tib. ངོ་ལོག་ཟིང་འཁྲུག་པ].   

**Q:**  Did they arrest him in Chamdo?   

**A:**  No, he was arrested in Derge. At that time, there was no revolt in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  There was some revolt there.   

**A:**  Jayang Palmo had only one son and Jagö Tomden's son or nephew was accused of being a rebel and arrested. Later, I heard that after the reforms, his daughter was agitated and went to India and became a People's Deputy [Tib. སྤྱི་འཐུས]. At that time, Oga was 17 years old and he was imprisoned for about 22 years on accusations that he launched the revolt. He was released in 1978. He became an old man in his forties. Now, Jayang Palmo's lineage from the Derge King has been broken. At that time, Jayang Palmo cried and told Premier Zhou that the revolt in Kham didn't happen like Premier Zhou said. Jagö Tomden was very aggressive. I heard that he was a politician: he could act in a calm manner [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] when the policy treated him in a calm manner and dared to give his comments when it was necessary. Then he told the Central Committee all the things and said, "When we came here, we were the representatives of the people, but they told lies and held us. We were prisoners in Chengdu." And then they might have collected comments from many sides. Then Tian Bao, Tashi Wangchuk [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་ཕྱུག], and one vice shuji who was of Yi nationality who used to be in the Red Army - I forget his name, he was a Chinese called Zhang. These three people told their comments to Premier Zhou, saying that this conduct was not good and that the cadres were not respecting them. They didn't dare criticize [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] Li Jingquan because he was high-ranking, but they criticized Fan Zhizhong. Li Weihan and Liu Geping of the United Front Bureau agreed with their opinion and didn't agree about what the Sichuan Province had done. First they [tried to send] Yang Jinren, but he declined and said that he was not appropriate to go. Premier Zhou said the best would be for Li Weihan himself to go, but Li Weihan said that he would not go. Long after that, Liu Geping, being a Muslim, told me that Deng Xiaoping, Li Weihan and Li Jingquan were schoolmates in France when they went with Premier Zhou in 1922-1923 and the leader was Premier Zhou. There were about 10 people who were the main leaders of the CCP and even now they are. From that time, Liu Geping, Deng Xiaoping, and Li Jingquan were not friendly and Li Weihan was their leader. Deng Xiaoping was not even a CCP member in 1922; he was a member of the Youth League. Li Weihan was a schoolmate of Chairman Mao and later became the schoolmate of Premier Zhou. Li Weihan and Premier Zhou were the leaders of the Branch Communist Party [Ch. zhi bu] of France, and Deng Xiaoping and Li Jingquan were their subordinates. Later, after the liberation, Deng Xiaoping and Li Jingquan became high-ranking and it was said that Li Weihan made a mistake on leftism in his history and he was a just a zhongyang uyön [member]. Li Weihan thought there would be contradiction with [?]; Premier Zhou sent Liu Geping who suffered the loss. Liu Geping told me that Premier Zhou told him, "Since you are Muslim, it will be easy to talk with them, so you must go." After the reforms, Liu Geping didn't get a job, and I would go see him often.   

**Q:**  In what months was that?   

**A:**  The meeting was held in July. In June, the National People's Congress was held. Li Weihan said that this comment is correct and reported it to Premier Zhou and Chairman Mao and they said that we should do the reforms. They sent Liu Geping and Wang Weizhou, with Liu Geping as the vice chairman [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ་གཞོན་པ].   

**Q:**  Was that the good will team [Tib. འཚམས་འདྲི་ཚོགས་པ]?   

**A:**  Yes. That was called in Chinese [Ch. wei wen tuan]. Wang Weizhou was a senior revolutionary, but his health was not good so the main work was done by Liu Geping.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you with them?   

**A:**  No, I was on my way down and they were coming up. Then the Central Committee held the meeting and criticized [Tib. གཤེ་གཤེ་བཏང] Li Jingquan and said that what he did was wrong and was "not prepared well enough andthat he pitched into work in a hurried manner" [Ch. zhunbei buzu cangcu shangzhen][Tib. གྲ་སྒྲིག་མ་ལྡང་པ། འཚབ་ཚུབ་ཀྱིས་ལས་ཀ་བྱས་པ] - although it was right to do the reforms, he didn't prepare well. Then they also said that the so-called "direct transition and reach the sky in a single bound" [Ch. zhi jie guo du/ yi bu deng tian Tib. ཐད་ཀའི་བར་བརྒལ། གོམ་པ་ཅིག་གིས་གནམ་ལ་སླེབས་པ] was also wrong. When these were reported up, probably the Central Committee was really going to make a decision, but Fan Zhizhong didn't agree to this and said what we did was correct. Since Liu Geping was sent by the Central Committee, and he had the power, Fan Zhizhong was demoted to vice shuji and Tian Bao was appointed as shuji. Fan Zhizhong had given criticism that Li Jingquan wasn't acting tough [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ] enough and the work was done by his subordinates. Therefore, after the revolt took place, Liu Geping had a lot of trouble because many said that he was a rightist [Tib. གཡས]. When we went there, they were opposing the left, but when he came back in 1957, they had started opposing the rightists and he didn't have anything to do. In 1958, they set up the Ningxia Muslim Autonomous region [Tib. ཉིང་ཤ་ཧུཨི་རིགས་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས] and he was appointed as its chairman.   

**Q:**  How did they name Liu Geping as rightist?   

**A:**  They said he didn't struggle with the rebels and he surrendered to them and he was too lenient [Tib. ལྷོད་དྲག་བཞག]. Liu Geping was saying "it is too strict and you should not make war."   

**Q:**  This was said by Chairman Mao himself when they held the meeting in June 1956, he said, "We have made a serious mistake; however, we must do the democratic reform."   

**A:**  Yes, he said we must do the democratic reforms and the direction is right, but the way of doing was wrong. Chairman Mao being a politician, he talked from both sides: first he said that we must do the democratic reforms, but later when they complained [Tib. སྡུག་སྐད་རྒྱག], he might have said that the democratic reforms were done too excessively.   

**Q:**  I heard that when Liu Geping was among the good will team and when they went to Dartsedo, they planned to do a cease-fire for 2 months and start talking with the Khambas. Did you ever hear that?   

**A:**  I heard that, but I don't think such a thing happened. With whom would they hold the talks? There is no organization of Chushigandru and all of the people went to the mountains.   

**Q:**  In Litang, was there a lama in the monastery who sent a message? Was that when the Chinese sent 3-4 people?   

**Q:**  Yes, they sent people and said that they would have 2 months of cease-fire for the Khambas to come to them and talk. I heard this from both sides and this was the central government's plan. It was strange.   

**A:**  Actually, they made a 14 point policy. Tian Bao and both of them told me that they made this policy. Now I can't see this document which was announced in the name of Tian Bao who was the leader [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན] of the Ganzi Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང; Ch. zhou]. We didn't have the authority to read this when I wrote the biography of Tian Bao. This 14 point policy was regarded as the main crime of Liu Geping and it was said it was too lenient and there were too many "do nots," like "do not fight with the monastery," etc., and there was not enough of the word "do." Liu Geping still holds that that the 14 points were correct, and that if we had done that, there would not have been the trouble in Kham.   

**Q:**  Liu Geping went twice to Kham, right?   

**A:**  He went four times. First, he went in 1950: he was there when they set up the Autonomous Region in Kham and this year is its 60th year anniversary. He went when the Dalai Lama came to Kham in 1955 and then twice in 1956, the first with the investigation team and the second with the good will team.   

**Q:**  It seems that Li Weihan was behind Liu Geping.   

**A:**  Yes. And Premier Zhou and Deng Xiaoping were behind Li Jingquan.   

**Q:**  In 1957, Deng Xiaoping gave a strong speech.   

**A:**  This was on 15th of March.   

**Q:**  I have that; it was written that you can do things recklessly (Tib. གངཆུང་མངཆུང [གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང]) and you can hold struggle sessions in a malicious way [Tib. གནག་པོ]. I also heard that in 1956, they didn't fight many battles because the PLA didn't go to the mountain and they called the people in the mountain to come over.   

**A:**  This was written in the 14 points.   

**Q:**  And they did the cease-fire for 2 months and at that time, the Khambas said they would not hand over the guns. From 1957-1958, the PLA went to find the Khambas and then made a big war and I heard many people were killed on both sides.   

**A:**  In 1956, they said don't make war. Liu Geping didn't have a military rank and I think he didn't have the power to tell the soldiers to make war or not to make war. If he had told them to have a cease-fire for 2 months, this would be a serious mistake according to the constitution of the CCP. I think he would never do that. After they held the meeting in June 1956, they did the cease-fire - this was not the cease-fire for 2 months for holding the talks. They were saying do not make war and win them over. If they had told them to have two months cease-fire, this would show that the Chinese accepted (Tib. ཁེལེན [ཁས་ལེན]) the Khambas. The CCP was regarding them as rebels. If Liu Geping had talked with them, he would have made a mistake and the CCP would have regarded him as a real rightist.   

**Q:**  At that time, this was not made by Liu Geping, but Beijing had a plan and they wanted to have the disturbance calmed in Tibet because it would have a bad effect in Tibet and the Khambas' trouble was a small one. This was a government decision and in 1957, the Dalai Lama went back and the Khambas again said that they would not hand over their guns and they made a severe war against the PLA and many people came to Lhasa. In 1956, if the Khambas stayed in the mountain, they could have stayed there and killed some people on their way. The PLA didn't have the plan to chase them everywhere and annihilate them.   

**A:**  This was after the Deng Xiaoping's speech on 15th of March [1957].   

**Q:**  In 1956, the big households came up with their wealth like gold and silver. For instance, Gyadotsang [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་ཚང] came up through Lhasa to Kalimpong with 20 mules loaded with silver bars (Tib. རྒྱང་སཕ [རྒྱ་དངུལ་ས་ཕག]). In 1957, the Khambas who were making war came to Lhasa and then in 1958, Chushigandru started. I heard that on the first meeting about what to do about the reforms, Sichuan made a plan and Li Weihan and Liu Geping said that in Beijing, they shouldn't start the reforms right away and instead should do research on it first. They held a big meeting in October and in 1955, first Mao Zedong told them not to act like the Chinese women with bound feet, and to go back to their own places and think about it and bring the back plans in two months. They brought the plan and they planned to start in Sichuan. However, Li Weihan said that we probably should not do this; first we should think about it and the Nationality Committee [Ch. min wei] should investigate it. Tian Bao said, "if we do that [reforms], there is a danger of having a rebellion by the Khambas," but Li Jingquan didn't listen to this and went to Sichuan. It seems strange to me because Li Weihan is above Li Jingquan, but he was not attentive and he started the reforms. Wasn't this strange?   

**A:**  I don't know in detail, but Li Weihan and Li Jingquan had a contradiction and the main thing is that Deng Xiaoping and Li Weihan had a contradiction. In the past, when they were the Red Army in Jiangxi, they had the contradiction and Li Weihan took Deng Xiaoping's wife. The reason why Li Jingquan dared to do [reforms] was because Deng Xiaoping was behind him. Otherwise, he would not dare to do that. As for Li Weihan, sometimes Premier Zhou and Chairman Mao would say that his opinion was good, but actually they not support him. At that time, Li Weihan was just a ordinary Central Committee member [Tib. uyön], not a uyön of the Party Politburo [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་ཇུས] and later Li Jingquan became a member (uyön) of the Politburo. At that time, Li Jingquan had great strength [Tib. ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ] with leftists. In 1958, during the great leap forward [Tib. མཆོང་སྐྱོད་ཆེན་པོ], the deaths of the people from starvation were also caused by that. So this is possible. Liu Geping was the vice director [Ch. fu buzhang] of the national United Front Bureau, but Li Jingquan didn't come to meet him with an excuse of having work and sent the vice shuji Liao Zhigao when Liu Geping went to Chengdu. According to rank, Li Geping was higher because he was the third rank party in the salary scale and Li Jingquan was the fourth rank. Zhang Guohua, Tan Guansan, and Ngabö were the sixth rank. And at that time, Phünwang La was very high-ranking and he was in the eighth party rank. Zhao Ziyang and Hua Guofeng were tenth rank. Liu Geping and Deng Xiaoping were the same third rank.   

**Q:**  How about Fan Zhizhong?   

**A:**  He was very low-ranking. Liu Geping had the power of demoting him because he [Fan Zhizhong] was a leader of the Autonomous Region. This was because Fan Zhizhong didn't listen to Liu Geping. At that time, the shuji was Tan Guansan and the vice shuji was Fan Zhizhong and he remained like this till the Cultural Revolution. According to the system of the CCP, it is hard to make changes if something is confirmed. Li Jingquan couldn't make changes because he was demoted by Liu Geping, unless one is powerful like Chairman Mao.   

**Q:**  After the revolt took place in Ba and Litang, the soldiers came and the Khambas went to the mountain. Did they start the democratic reforms?   

**A:**  Yes, they started the democratic reforms at the end of 1956. In 1958, they set up the People's Commune [Ch. renmin gongshe] and they really reached the sky with a single bound. People didn't have food to eat and died from starvation [unclear?]. Doing the democratic reforms, starting collectives [Tib. མཉམ་ལས] and demolishing the capitalism was the root policy of the CCP. When there were difficulties, they would make the policy a little bit crooked [Tib. ཀྱོག་ཙམ]. Chairman Mao was not saying it was wrong to do the reforms, but the way of reforming was wrong and that there had not been enough preparations.   

**Q:**  Fan Zhizhong said that when doing reforms, we must discuss with the high-ranking people and we must also mobilize [Tib. སྐུལ་སློང] the lower people. The lower people must shout with enthusiasm. If they don't, the higher-ranking figures will not pay attention. This was the same as Fan Ming's thought.   

**A:**  Yes. This was a principal work line [Tib. རྩ་བའི་བྱེད་སྟངས] of the CCP: to mobilize the masses and the hold struggle sessions against the land lords. Premier Zhou, Li Weihan, and Chairman Mao had been to Russia and knew the situation in Europe, so they put forward a new method for benefitting the masses that didn't destroy the higher ups [Tib. གོང་རིམ], but benefitted them. [Jambey Gyatso started asking Dr. Goldstein regarding the revolt in Kham and CIA etc. to the end of side A and about one third of the side B]   

**A:**  In 1956, when they held the National People's Congress, Li Weihan was the Buzhang of the United Front Bureau and Wu Lanfu and Liu Geping were Vice Buzhangs. Li Weihan was the Vice Chairman [Ch. wei yuan zhang; Tib. གཞོན་པ] and Dalai Lama also became the Vice Chairman. The position of the zhuren was given to Wu Lanfu. This was in September. Liu Geping was the Vice Buzhang of the United Front Bureau and the zhuren of the Nationality Committee [Tib. མི་རིགས་དོན་གཅོད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] in the National People's Congress. The government zhuren of the Nationality Committee [Ch. minwei] was Wu Lanfu and two of them were equal rank, but the Congress didn't have any power except to raise hands and agree. Actually, Wu Lanfu should have gone to Tibet [to investigate], but he didn't go.   

**Q:**  He didn't want to go, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he knew that there will be trouble there. Liu Geping was really an honest person [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་ཇོག], so he went there. At that time, they knew that there would be trouble, so Wu Lanfu didn't go and Yang Jinren said that he was not capable of doing that because he knew that there will be contradictions. Liu Gepin thought that he was sincere and went there. Later he faced trouble and offended Deng Xiaoping and Li Jingquan.   

**Q:**  What do you think about Mao Zedong's thought?   

**A:**  I am telling you the truth. He is too high for me [to comment. Chairman Mao is very ingenious (Tib. trengyu mangpo [དྲན་རྒྱུ་མང་པོ]) and it is said that he is very deceitful (Tib. ཡུགྱུ་ཙཔོ [གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ཚ་པོ]) on politics. So I don't know the truth. But according to my opinion, and I also wrote in my article, I have faith in Chairman Mao though he acted very badly during the Cultural Revolution. On the history of the People's Republic of China, it was Chairman Mao who said strongly that we must have national equality and national friendship [Tib. མི་རིགས་འདྲ་མཉམ་དང་མཐུན་སྒྲིལ]. He also said that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama are the leaders of the nationality [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན] and said "it is not okay to only say Long Live the Chairman Mao, you must also say Long Live the Dalai Lama and Long Live the Panchen Lama." Even at that time, Deng Xiaoping didn't say that - let alone say it later on. Chairman Mao and Li Weihan didn't have a good personal relationship and it was difficult for Li Weihan because he didn't have good relations with Deng Xiaoping. Chairman Mao had a strong animosity towards Li Weihan (Tib. ཤེདང [ཞེ་སྡང]) because in the early times, Chairman Mao and Li Weihan had a quarrel when the Communists were in Jinggang Shan [Mt. Jinggang in Jiangxi]. At that time, Deng Xiaoping sided with Chairman Mao and in 1933, Li Weihan rebuked (Tib. གགཔ [དགག་པ]) Chairman Mao's younger brother Mao Zetai. This year in April, I went to the place where they held the meeting and the struggle session. At that time, Deng Xiaoping was not high-ranking. He was just a shuji of the county committee. Li Weihan was an uyön (member) of the Politburo. At that time, Chairman Mao and Zhu De had the military power in their hands. Wang Mingyi, who came from the Moscow Communist Party, believed in [real/ pure] communism and rebuked Chairman Mao saying "there is no Marxism and Leninism in the grotto [yandong]" [Tib. རི་ཁུག་ནང་ལ་མ་ཁེ་སི་ལེ་ཉིན་རིང་ལུགས་ཡོད་མ་རེད]. And they were saying that Mao Zedong is not Marxist and Leninist and he is the one who is doing farmer's revolution [Tib. ཞིང་པའི་གསར་བརྗེ]. But Chairman Mao had the soldiers in his hands and they didn't have soldiers because they came from Moscow to Shanghai. Actually, Li Weihan also had been to Moscow and when they came and they couldn't move (Tib. gkyo gya mathub [འགུལ་སྐྱོད་རྒྱག་མ་ཐུབ]) Chairman Mao, but they demoted Chairman Mao's shuji title of the CCP because they were powerful. And they said that the following four people; Deng Xiaoping, Mao Zedong 's younger brother who died in Xinjiang, Xie and Gubo were the running dogs [of Chairman Mao] and Li Weihan held struggle sessions against them. From that time, they [Li Weihan and Mao Zedong] had hatred because Li Weihan was on the side of those opposing Chairman Mao. When he [Li Weihan] came to Yan'an, his title of uyön of the Politburo was demoted and became an ordinary zhongyang uyön. He [Li Weihan] was an old revolutionary, but his title was not stable and he was demoted from Politburo at the Eight Party Congress in 1956. So Li Weihan had the opinions, but he didn't have power and people backing him. Deng Xiaoping was very deceitful (Tib. ཡུགྱུ་ཙཔོ [གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ཚ་པོ]) and he liked to select his own people. The reason people respected Zhou Enlai was because he didn't pull up his own supporters (Tib. ཆོགཏོག [ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས]). There wasn't anything like Zhou Enlai's secretary and his relatives who got promoted and he was just doing his work like I work on Gesar. So he also got the advantages for doing this. For example, later on, there were the Pro-Deng Xiaoping and Pro-Mao Zedong and Pro-Linbiao [factions], there was no Pro-Zhou Enlai. This was because Zhou Enlai was friendly with all the people and didn't oppose anybody. Therefore, there was no need to oppose him because he remained steady. Li Weihan was well educated and also thoughtful, but he didn't get along well with both Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping. And he took away Deng Xiaoping's wife. The leader of the Academy of the Social Sciences was Li Weihan's son. So Deng Xiaoping and Li Jingquan became powerful and they also had the groups like the southern group [Tib. ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས]. Li Weihan didn't have that and Wu Lanfu, the Mongolian was standing behind him and Liu Geping was also there, but they were not like a pro-people [Li weihan] groups. Liu Geping remained alone though he was high-ranking. I believe that Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou treated Liu Geping very nicely. Liu Geping and Wu Lanfu were the two leaders from the minority nationalities and they were regarded very highly. At that time, Deng Xiaoping was the General Party Secretary [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ; Ch. shu ji]. In my book I didn't write Chairman Mao's history during the Cultural Revolution because in 1950, I wrote only how Chairman Mao had great affection (Tib. ཙེཔོ [བརྩེ་པོ]) towards the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. But now they [Chinese officials] are defaming (Tib. tsenmey [མཚན་སྨད] ཧིམ [ཐེ་ཌལཻ་ལམ] a lot saying he is a ghost wearing the religious mask [Tib. ཆོས་འབག་གོན་པའི་གདུག་འདྲེ] and a wolf wearing sheep's skin [Tib. ལུག་ལྤགས་གོན་པའི་སྤྱང་ཀི]. So I wrote all the things about how Chairman Mao praised him in my book. I think that on the one hand, ཆཻརྨན་མཨོ་ཝས་ཨ་ཕ༹རྨེར and ཧེ་ཝས་ཨལསོ་པོཨོར and had a great affection towards his mother. Therefore, after the liberatio, he was treating the minority nationalities including the Tibetans very nicely and he was talking about nationality autonomy and nationality territory [Tib. མི་རིགས་རང་སྐྱོང་དང་ས་ཁོངས]. When I look at it, it was Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou who talked about these things the most and then next was Li Weihan. Deng Xiaoping really didn't talk much about that. Therefore, I don't talk about the so called the "theory of Deng Xiaoping". Chairman Mao, Premier Zhou Enlai and Li Weihan had talked a lot about the minority nationalities because they had loyalty to the people who had suffered from oppression (Tib. nyanön [གཉའ་གནོན]). The second is on women, he was saying that women suffered in the old society. The whole world is saying that the Cultural Revolution was not good and if the Cultural Revolution was good, Deng Xiaoping could not stand up. However, during the Cultural Revolution in 1969, when they held the 9th National People's Congress, at that time, I was in Beijing though I was just an interpreter in the meeting and not a representative. At that time, Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping were overthrown and when they elected the representatives, he [Chairman Mao] said purposely "among the representatives and the zhongyang uyön, the people from the minority nationalities and women must have a part of it [Tib. ཆ་ཤས་ཟིན]". In the Cultural Revolution, so many people were destroyed and people were saying the Chairman Mao became crazy. However, he still didn't forget minority nationalities and women. I wrote this in another article which is published, but not in this book. In this book, I wrote about the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama. There is one of Mao Zedong's books called "Tibet" which is not yet published. Later, Liu Geping 's wife [pointing at the photo taken with the Dalai Lama's sister in his book] also suffered a lot saying that she became very close with the reactionaries. In this photo, she wore a Tibetan dress and she was regarding them [Dalai Lama's family] highly. So in the Cultural Revolution, they held struggle sessions and accused her that this was a crime and she was expelled from the party. I have written about this in this book. This photo was taken in 1955 when the Dalai Lama came to the religious association.   

**Q:**  What do you think about Mao Zedong, after taking Chamdo, why didn't he do the democratic reforms right away. Why did he leave the Tibetan Government and the Tibetan custom? What was his thinking?   

**A:**  This was because they signed the 17-Point Agreement in 1951 and they were acting in accordance with this. Chairman Mao was thinking about this from the Yan'an period [1937-45]. He was not an easy man and he thought a lot and read a lot of books. Though he didn't go to foreign countries, he [did the research] on how America and Russia were settling the matters of the nationalities. And at that time, Li Weihan set up the Yan'an Nationality School and all of his titles were demoted, though he had a high rank in the Central Committee and he did the research on the matters concerning nationalities. At that time, Tian Bao and those people were also there. Later, Tian Bao told me, "at that time, they decided to settle the nationality matter in a way which was different from both America and Russia. At that time, Chairman Mao was thinking about that and Li Weihan and those people were the first who put forward the nationality territorial autonomy [Tib. མི་རིགས་ས་ཁོངས་རང་སྐྱོང] and this was approved by Chairman Mao. They said that we cannot use the Federal Republic [Ch. jia meng gong he guo; Tib. རྒྱལ་ཕྲན་མཉམ་འབྲེལ] system of Russia. Nationality Territorial Autonomy is different from America and this was said to be created by Chairman Mao. I wrote a little bit about this though I didn't write much about the theory. Chairman Mao was broad minded person but the people who came from Moscow were saying that he is farmer's revolutionary [Ch. nong min geming tib zhing pa'i gsar brje pa pa]. Chairman Mao said "I am not a farmer, I am a Marxist" And they told him that he haven't been to the foreign countries. Zhou Enlai had been to Europe and also Moscow. At that time, there was the person called Wangming who was very smart and knew many languages and could quote the Marxism and Leninism very fluently and they said there is no Marxism and Leninism in the ravine. At that time, Chairman Mao thought that America and the Russia had their customs but in the future what shall the People's Republic of China do. I wrote in my book, it was not that they were afraid of a few Tibetan kudrak and didn't do the reforms and didn't make war. Actually, the People's Republic of China is so strong and they could have just killed those few people who opposed them if they want to do the revolution. Chairman Mao read many books and said Tibet is a special land and I also knew the history of Tibet the first time from the Works of Mao Zedong because we were not allowed to read other books then. This book is not published yet and in that book it was written that Chairman Mao told the Dalai Lama "historically, the Tibetans were powerful and you acted arrogantly [Tib. ཧམ་པ] towards the Chinese and you came to Xian twice and arrested two of our emperors". I heard that Mao Zedong hadn't been to the foreign countries and he didn't even know how to play cards and he would not play mahjong. He is fond of two things; one is to read books and other is to have sex with women" [laughs] When he read books and got tired, he would go to have sex with women. This was said later when they insulted him. I don't know whether he really had many women, but he really read lots of books. He was really a countryside person and would not play ball and he would swim in the river because there was no swimming pools then. Long after that, they built a swimming pool in Zhongnanhai. The countryside children would swim in the river naked and he also did the same when he was young. In the past, the children never wore swimming suits. When they insulted him, they said that books he read were old books, not the books of Marxism and Leninism. According to my opinion, there are two benefits from holding the flag of Mao Zedong; one is that if I talk about you you should not do those things to the Dalai Lama, they will say "you are a small person" and they will press me down right away and they will also say "your standpoint is not steady and you didn't know the things about the reactionaries. But when I say that Chairman Mao said that, so if you think this is not right, you can read his book and rebuke Chairman Mao. So they couldn't rebuke him and that's why I could remain secure. On the other hand when I wrote a lot in my book and introduced the people that it was said by the Chairman Mao that Tibet is a special land and we should respect the Tibetan culture. This was exactly the same as what Hu Yaobang said and they didn't have anything to say. Deng said that we must use force [Tib. དྲག་པོ] when the revolt took pace and they paid the money for that. There were some people who were saying that we must use force and suppress [Tib. དྲག་གནོན] them. And some were saying "Renminbi currency put on the machine gun" [Ch. jiguan qiang jia renmin bi]. This means if you listen to the order, they give you money but if they [Tibetans] didn't listen, then they shoot them with the machine gun. Chairman Mao had never said things like that and it just depended on whether they implement the policy or not. Chairman Mao was saying that you must respect the nationalities. When I use this [Chairman Mao's] flag, on the one hand, I can rebuke them and on the other hand, I can protect myself. You people are staying in a free country, but I am staying there.   

**Q:**  How did Hu Yaobang rise up? How did his new policy come out under Deng Xiaoping?   

**A:**  I don't know much about it but he [Hu Yaobang] suffered during the Cultural Revolution and he thought a lot about the state. Hu Yaobang and Deng Xiaoping were different and Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang were also different. I think Deng Xiaoping turned over [Tib. ཨ་ལོག་རྒྱག] the things that he had suffered and on the matters that he didn't suffer, he had the same thought like Mao Zedong who bullied people by force [Tib. བཙན་པོ་དབང་ཡོད] and he had a strong communist idea [Tib. དམར་པོའི་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ]. I heard that there were two people who Chairman Mao trusted; in military, it was Lin Biao and in the local affairs [Tib. ས་གནས] it was Deng Xiaoping. People were saying that from early times. Later, Lin Biao and Deng Xiaoping had a quarrel and Lin Biao lost and Deng Xiaoping won. First, Lin Biao was raised and Deng Xiaoping fell and later after Lin Biao died, Deng Xiaoping rose. Actually, he [Deng Xiaoping] was responsible for all the things done before the Cultural Revolution because he was the General Party Secretary, so he took the responsibilities of all the things done by Chairman Mao. Lin Biao was not responsible because he said that he was sick and asked for leave. Therefore, Deng Xiaoping only turned over what he had been accused of in the Cultural Revolution. Hu Yaobang was saying that we had made many mistakes before that [Cultural Revolution], so we have to correct them. It was not only the Tibetan issue, there were other nationality issues, so later he [Hu Yaobang] was accused of being the bourgeois liberalization [Ch. zichan jeiji ziyou hua; Tib. འབྱོར་ལྡན་གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་རང་མོས་རིང་ལུགས་པ].   

**Q:**  Was Deng Xiaoping in favor of what Hu Yaobang was doing in Tibet?   

**A:**  When I look at it later on, he didn't support him.   

**Q:**  At that time, he didn't support him, right?   

**A:**  He [Deng Xiaoping] neither supported him nor opposed him. Therefore, not only this, many of Hu Yaobang's work was not practicable [Tib. དོན་ཐོག་འཁྱོལ].   

**Q:**  Hu Yaobang was supposed to correct the mistakes made before the Cultural Revolution, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was saying that there were more serious mistakes made before the Cultural Revolution and these should be corrected. For example, Hu Yaobang gave a speech at a meeting where there were 4,000 people and he also gave speeches at other meetings. At that time, he said that Zhongyang will put forward three suggestions [regarding Tibet]: the defense power [stays with China], the foreign relations power where Tibet is not allowed to make relations with foreign countries as a nation, and then there was the negation power [Ch. fou ding quan; Tib. ཁས་མི་ལེན་པའི་དབང་ཆ] [the power to not accept things]. Other that these three, you [Tibet] can do whatever you want to do and you can develop capitalism. Anyway, you have to make the masses rich. And Wan Li, who is still alive, also said "only capitalism is not enough, you have to do the capitalism with great development [Tib. འཕེལ་རྒྱས་ཆེན་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་མ་རྩ་རིང་ལུགས]. At that time, Hu Yaobang and Wan Li went together to Tibet. Wan Li meant to say capitalism with great development like you Americans did. Later, it was said that they were accused of opposing socialism and this became their main crime. Actually, this was same as what the Dalai Lama spoke about as the "big freedom" [Tib. རང་དབང་ཆེན་པོ] or as total independence [Tib. རང་བཙན་གཙང་མ] or high level autonomy [Tib. ཚད་མཐོ་པོའི་རང་སྐྱོང]. I heard that Ngabö spoke of high level freedom [Tib. ཚད་མཐོ་པོའི་རང་དབང], but Ngabö wouldn't dare to say such things. Later, didn't they oppose them saying, independence is not okay and the half independence is also not okay and high level freedom is also not okay. The independence is meant for the Dalai Lama and the high level freedom is meant for Ngabö and the half independence is meant the Panchen Lama. They were saying verbally "the Dalai Clique" and we are opposing separatism [Tib. ཁ་བྲལ་རིང་ལུག], but they were hitting the stick on Ngabö.   

**Q:**  Is there a book in which Ngabö's speech given on a meeting in Lhasa is written?   

**A:**  This was in 1988.   

