# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** 16 May 2006  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He subsequently became a translator and cadre and later a researcher/author in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In this interview, he talks about how he joined the PLA, his work as an interpreter, and his time as a member of the 53rd division. He discusses in detail the Dalai Lama’s arrival in Chengdu, the meeting there with the Chinese, and the issue about where the Dalai Lama would sit. He also discusses the positions of various leaders in both the Tibetan and Chinese committees and the different interpreters for the leaders. He describes the democratic reforms resolution and how Mao Zedong criticized the implementation of the reforms. He also describes, in detail, the disbanding of Xikang province, his time as a member of the Work Team and the County Committee, as well as the revolt in Litang. He then talks about the bombing of 4 monasteries, including Litang. Finally, he discusses the critique by Chairman Mao regarding Deng Zihui, and how Li Weihan took away Deng Xiaoping’s wife.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_05/H_0060_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1955, you went from Lhasa to school in Chengdu, right?   

**A:**  That was in 1954.   

**Q:**  Please tell me about these things. Where did you go from Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was in the People's Liberation Army in 1950 before the Chamdo War because my older brother was with Phünwang [Tib. ཕུན་དབང] in the so-called East Tibet Minjing [Ch. dong hua min jing]. I was just a child. My home was a bit poor and after the liberation they had livelihood problems and they didn't have any place to go. After finishing primary school, there wasn't a middle school to go to. The middle school that was supposed to be set up by the GMD had been closed, so I had neither work nor school. We didn't have land or nomad herds and didn't have a livelihood. Therefore, we thought that the People's Liberation Army was good. My brother then wrote me a letter saying that I should join the People's Liberation Army because it would make me happy. Two of my sisters also joined the People's Liberation Army: one is now in the Nationality Office [Tib. མི་རིགས་ལས་ཁུངས] and the other is in the Tibet Autonomous Region. When we went to Lhasa, they were building the road on the Tangmala [Tib. སྟག་མ་ལ] Mountain Pass. I joined the revolution before the Chamdo War — it took place when I was a child — so we didn't go to Chamdo during the war. After the war was over and the People's Liberation Army had arrested the Tibetan soldiers, Ford and I saw all of them. There was a news reporter of the Xinhua News Agency named Lintan. He is retired and still alive — in his eighties — and staying in Gansu. At the time, the Bapa people only knew Tibetan and a little bit of Chinese. The Bapa and people from Dartsedo also did not speak in pure Tibetan; their Tibetan was mixed with Chinese. We could be the interpreters. At the time, interpreters were very rare. Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, and the news reporters all needed interpreters, but didn't have any, so I was taken by Lintan. Lintan's duty was to take Ford from Chamdo to Beijing because he knew a little bit of English. He went to the university in the old society and knew about policy. He had two soldiers with him and I was the interpreter. At that time, I knew some Chinese like "imperialist" [Ch. di guo zhu yi] and "spy" [Ch. te wu jian die]. I just knew the terms but did not know the meaning. After they quelled the war in Chamdo, they signed the Agreement. Before that, we soldiers were building the road between Kham and Tibet, making preparations for the war, and making the roads on the Tangmala Pass. At the end of May or June when I was around 12 or 13 years old, I saw Ngabö and Zhang Guohua. At that time, Zhang Jingwu came to Lhasa via India and Zhang Guohua and Ngabö came from Ganzi. Our regiment was the 53rd Division [Ch. shi]. The 52nd Division went up from Ba and Ganzi and fought in Chamdo. When the soldiers arrived and we had to offer them flowers, I offered the flowers to Zhang Guohua. They said that they needed people in the Song and Dance Ensemble in the Military Area Command [Tib. jun qu wen gong tuan]. Our 53rd Division didn't reach Lhasa and stayed in Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ]. As you know, not only was there conflict between the west and the north, but also there were internal conflicts within the 18th Army Corps. The 52nd and the 53rd Division had conflicts: our regiment suffered the loss and the 52nd Division became the most powerful. The 54th Division had the most difficut time because they were building the road. Later, most of the leaders in the Tibet Military Area Command were from the 52nd Division, like Ying Fatang. We, the 53rd, didn't grow as influential: the highest position we got was the Vice Chief of Staff [Tib. ཕུ༹་ཅན་མོཨུ་ཞང] of the Tibet Military Area Command. I worked under them. The Song and Dance Ensemble wanted me as the interpreter and they didn't have Tibetans to act as children. The ensemble was large and had a great duty. That's how I came to the Military Area Command and became the interpreter of the Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, and the Chief of Staff, Lijue. I was not the main interpreter. The main interpreters were Phünwang, his younger brother Thuwang, the Chinese Fu Shizhong, and Phundra [Tib. ཕུན་བཀྲ]. They were called the big interpreters [Ch. ta fan yi]. We were the small interpreters [Ch. xiao fan yi]. We were doing small interpretations and would not get to the place where they would interpret big things. We would go to interpret when they talked about the united front. At that time we didn't know the Lhasa dialect because we were Khambas. They decided that we would have to go study the Lhasa dialect at the cadre school [Tib. ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ] that was set up in Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ཁ], so we learned the Lhasa dialect. I came to know that the teachers were all high scholars. Some Khambas didn't want to learn the Lhasa dialect, saying that the Khamba dialect was also Tibetan, but I was a child and learned the Lhasa dialect. I stayed in Lhasa for 2 years. In 1954, the road was yet to be built. I was wearing a military uniform and was sent to Chengdu for study. My older brother and several others were with me. There were two when we went down and we walked, even though we were soldiers. It took 56 days to travel from Lhasa to Chamdo. Among the ones who came to China on horseback was Ngabö Rinchen and some kudrak kids who went to study in the Zhongyang Institute of Nationalities [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]. There were about 10 children who rode horses. The most important thing about the trip was that the Dalai Lama came. In the beginning, the Dalai Lama was carried in a sedan chair, but since Zhang Jingwu rode a horse, the Dalai Lama didn't sit in the sedan. From the Lhasa ferry site, the Dalai Lama also rode a horse. Before we reached Chamdo we met the Dalai Lama. They came down via Powo for about 10 days where the road was yet to be built. So they came on horseback until Chamdo. Just after we reached Chamdo, the Dalai Lama and his retinue arrived and the Southwest Military Area Command [Ch. xi nan jun qu] came to receive him. At that time, Liu Bocheng and the Deng Xiaoping had arrived in Beijing, but the Military Area Command who made the reception needed an interpreter. I was their interpreter. I was not with the Dalai Lama but with the leaders of the Military Area Command. I remember clearly: we went in an American car loaded with loads of pigs and we didn't even have chairs. Then a Russian car was sent to receive the Dalai Lama and his retinue. The military leaders of the Chongqing came to receive the Dalai Lama and I went as their interpreter. After he arrived in Chengdu, the Dalai Lama went to Beijing [1954]. We stayed in Chengdu and studied. The next year when the Dalai Lama came back to Chongqing, the highest General, Shang Jiang Wang Qingting of the Military Area Command who had three stars on his shoulder, again received him and I was the interpreter. At the time, Thuwang La was the interpreter of the Dalai Lama and I was the interpreter of Wang Qingting. That is when I met the Dalai Lama. Phünwang was also interpreting, but since he was a leader, he didn't interpret much. Mostly, the interpreter was Thuwang and I also translated a little bit. When Wang Qingting talked, I translated into Tibetan. At first I didn't dare to interpret and told Thuwang to do it, but he told me, "You don't have a problem. You are interpreting well. Go ahead and interpret." And the Dalai Lama also said, "You are interpreting well. Go ahead and interpret."   

**Q:**  When Zhou Enlai came to Chengdu...   

**A:**  I knew him and I met him, but I was not his interpreter. His interpreter was Thuwang La. We saw clearly the trouble made by Li Jingquan. Li Jingquan was the leader of Sichuan Province. Wang Qingting was the Vice Chairman [Ch. zhu xi; Tib. གཞོན་པ] of the Southwest Military Administrative Committee [Ch. xi nan jun zheng wei yuan hui] and also the Vice Political Commissar [Ch. fu zheng wei] of the Military Area Command. So he was higher, but in the People's Liberation Army, they were the same as generals. The title Shang Jiang had three stars. There were only ten who had 4 stars and they were the senior generals, with the title Da Jiang. Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, and Tan Guansan were lieutenant generals, and had the title Zhong Jiang, with 2 stars. There were 5 Zhong Jiang in Tibet then, including Ragashag [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] and Ngabö. Li Jingquan was also a general, a Shang Jiang, and he was powerful. He was the only Shang Jiang in the province. We knew the trouble was that they received the Dalai Lama in a very elaborate way when he came to Chongqing. Even though I was a child, when the Dalai came to Chengdu I was with the leaders because I was the interpreter. The Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama, Zhang Jingwu, and Liu Geping were in the special class train [Ch. zhuan lei] [Tib. དམིགས་བསལ་འཁོར་སྒྲོམ]. We were in third class with the clerks, interpreters, and bodyguards. When they needed interpreters, we had to go to them right away. Phünwang would sit in second class and talk with Zhang Jingwu and Liu Geping, even though his rank was not eligible for second class. When we arrived in Chengdu, we saw the trouble. At the time, Li Jingquan hadn't arrived, but Li Dazhang was there as was Yan Hongyan, who later became the Shang Jiang of the west. When they arrived, there were not many people coming to receive them at the railway station. Li Dazhang was the Party Secretary of our province, but we didn't have any connection or conversation because he was a high leader of Sichuan, while we were just soldiers and students of the Southwest Institute of Nationalities. I had seen him on the stages. I saw Li Dazhang arrive: even in Chendgu in May, when it was very hot, he had his trench coat [Ch. feng yi] draped over his shoulders and was pacing back and forth. When the Dalai Lama came, he didn't take off his trench coat to shake hands with him. Let alone the Tibetan kudrak, even Thuwang was not happy with his behavior and he said in mixed Sichuan dialect and Tibetan, "Dog fucker! How the hell is he behaving." [Ch. gou ri di zhe ge yang zi a] [Tib. ཨ་ཕའི་རོ་ག་རེ་ཡིན་ཟེར་གྱི་ཡོད་རེད].   

**Q:**  Usually, do people do that?   

**A:**  No, this is not customary [Tib. ལུགས་སྲོལ་མེད་པ]. He draped his trench coat over his shoulders and shook hands with the Dalai Lama with one of his hands. When he shook hands with one hand, his trench coat fell down and he pulled it up. Wang Qingting shook hands with the Dalai Lama with both of his hands in Chongqing.   

**Q:**  Was this kind of act looking down on him [Dalai Lama]?   

**A:**  Not really looking down, but he was regarded as an ordinary person [Tib. སྤྱིར་བཏང]. Actually, there was a big gap between their ranks as Li Dazhang was not a lama.   

**Q:**  Was this the start of the trouble?   

**A:**  Some trouble probably started then. Some people said that signing the agreement was a mistake of the leftists and that they actually didn't need to sign the agreement. Signing the agreement caused the trouble. Instead of doing that, if they had just gone on and implemented the reforms, it would be finished. They started not adhering [to the agreement]. What should I say, this was the first. After having dinner, usually, the chairman of the province would give a speech and when they give a speech, they needed an interpreter, right? We were wondering who would be the interpreter. When the Dalai Lama gave the speech, Thuwang was the interpreter and this was confirmed, but they didn't prepare the interpreter to interpret his speech. Then Liu Geping said, "it would not be okay if you don't interpret. You should interpret it." At that time, Li Dazhang said, "Do you still have to interpret it?" That evening, Li Jingquan didn't come. He told them to call an interpreter. The main office [Tib. གཞུང་ལས་ཁང] of the Sichuan Province told them that they had an interpreter and called me. I was prepared for that: I told Thuwang to interpret, but he wanted me to do it. Thuwang was a famous interpreter and I was just a student. When he gave the speech, he actually should have stopped for a while, but instead went on speaking like he had a tax obligation. Then he took away the draft from me so I didn't have any guide to look at. Before it was interpreted, he went and sat on the chair. Then I stood up and interpreted it fully. At that time, some said I was good and bold, though I was just 16 or 17 years old. They told me that I interpreted well when I spoke Tibetan and that I respected the Dalai Lama and called him, "The precious stone that fulfilled one's wish," [Tib. ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ] though he just called him, "Dalai", Although I wouldn't dare to change the meaning, but I wouldn't call the Dalai Lama in that way. Since I interpreted it through my memory, Liu Geping said that I did well. He didn't know Tibetan, but he asked other people how I interpreted, and they said I did well. Then there were two troubles.   

**Q:**  Li Jingquan didn't come, right?   

**A:**  Yes, actually in the Central Committee document, it was written that the first leader should come to receive the Dalai Lama, but he didn't come. He was unlucky: it was May 5th, the birthday of Marx — we didn't know that then because there was some conflict between China and the Soviet Union and Khrushchev. We were holding the flag of Marx. There was a document from the Central Committee requiring all provinces to commemorate the birthday of Marx. I forget how many years it had been since he was born. It was also said that the first Party Secretary of the province should give a speech, so he didn't have any choice but to give a speech. All the leaders were supposed to attend the meeting, so we attended the meeting. There were work assignments for the interpreters. The Dalai Lama was the Vice Chairman [Tib. ཕུ༹་ཝེཨི་ཡུཨན་ཞང] then, but he was not seated on the chairman's stage. He instead was made to sit below: Liu Geping and Zhang Jingwu sat on the stage. Then Liu Geping said, "If he [Dalai Lama] can't sit on the stage, then I won't sit on the stage." Then the Dalai Lama was made to sit on the stage. Before the meeting, Liu Geping didn't know about the seating arrangement. We were just sitting below in a humble way. They didn't have the chair on the stage and only the Dalai Lama was made to sit on the stage. Ngabö and all were not there. Actually, Ngabö was also a Zhong Jiang. The Dalai Lama might have been angry: there was a lot of criticism, and the kudraks were very aggressive [Tib. ངར], saying that they are looking down on us and that we had been deceived. So Liu Geping didn't like it and he was the main one. Liu Geping and Chairman Mao had a good personal relationship and he also had a good relationship with Premier Zhou. His relation with Liu Shaoqi was not good.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  There was a different history on this. I will tell you gradually. In the past, when they stayed in the north, they were imprisoned, but Liu Geping didn't stay in the prison. Both Mao and Zhou treated Liu Geping well. Then he wrote a letter directly to Chairman Mao, Zhou Enlai, and Li Weihan and said that the Dalai Lama and those people are critical of the behavior of Li Jingquan, saying that it [his behavior] was not right. Usually, people like you and me would say, "I will not say who is right and who is wrong," but Li Geping said openly that Li Jingquan was wrong.   

**Q:**  Who was Liu Geping?   

**A:**  The third Vice Minister [Tib. ཕུ༹་བུ་ཞང] of the Ministry of the United Front [Ch. tong zhan bu]. The first was Li Weihan and the second was Wu Lanfu. He was also the Vice Director [Tib. ཞུ་རེན་གཞོན་པ] of the Nationality Committee [Tib. mi rigs uyön lhan khang]. Later, when the Standing Committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] of the People's Congress formed in 1954, he was the first director [Tib. ཞུ་རེན] of the Nationality Committee. This was the Ngabö's position and at present Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང] has this position. Li Weihan, Wu Lanfu, and Liu Geping were in the highest positions of the Nationality Committee.   

**Q:**  Was the Ministry of the United Front and the Nationality Committee the same?   

**A:**  No, the United Front is the party leadership. In the party, Li Weihan was the first Vice Minister, then Wu Lanfu, and then Liu Geping. In the government administration [Tib. སྲིད], Wu Lanfu was the one in charge and in the People's Congress, Liu Geping was the one in charge. Both Wu Lanfu and Liu Geping were the third rank and their rank and position [Tib. གོ་ས] were both high. Ngabö and Zhang Jingwu were the sixth rank. I heard that he [Liu] sent the letter then, but we didn't know about it at the time. I was not a party member — I was just in the Youth League. He kept these top secret and never told people. I heard Chairman Mao got angry and scolded him. Then he [Zhou] went to attend the Bandung Conference in Indonesia. This was an important meeting of the UNO because at that time the US was obstructing the PRC. He didn't come to Beijing, though, and went from Guangzhou. When he came to Chengdu, I had a top-secret meeting with him and it was not announced. When he talked with the Dalai Lama, the interpreter was Thuwang and I was not there. That time, they went to watch movies, toured, and talked for more than 2 hours. I stayed outside with the clerks and those people. The Premier Zhou and Chen Yi were famous generals then, and we were just students. We just waited outside and I did not do interpreting. The main interpreter was Thuwang, and Phünwang helped him a little bit. Thuwang was very tactful and respected Phünwang. After that, Premier Zhou scolded [Tib. གཤེ་གཤེ] Li Jingquan and Li Jingquan apologized to the Dalai Lama and held an elaborate seeing-off ceremony for him. It was still strange, though, and I don't know how to say it: some say that you cannot trust what the CCP says because there is an internal one and the external aspect. Actually, since Premier Zhou had said that he should have listened to it, he [Li Jingqua] did well when seeing him off from Chengdu up to to Ya'an. There was still the Xikang Province then. I went up to Chengdu to see the Dalai Lama off. When the Dalai Lama came to Ya'an, the high leaders of Sichuan were not there, so they were saying that they didn't come.   

**Q:**  Actually, this was something special, right?   

**A:**  Yes and they should have been careful. Later, Thuwang and I talked about that. The high leaders were imprisoned. When I looked at the newspaper after they were imprisoned, it said there weren't any high leaders.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was the leader of the Xikang Province?   

**A:**  The governor was Liao Zhigao and the vice governor was Sangye Yeshe [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས].   

**Q:**  Was Fan Zhizhong there?   

**A:**  He was not in Xikang Province. He was in Dartsedo as the Secretary of the Prefectural Party Committee [Ch. zhuan qu di wei shu ji]. At that time, Sangye Yeshe came to Ya'an. He was speaking Tibetan in a Gyarong [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] dialect and was not that fluent. Then we returned to Chengdu because we were supposed to belong to Sichuan. Sangye Yeshe or Tian Bao, was in Dartsedo and he came to receive the Dalai Lama in Ya'an. Their duty was to see him off until Chamdo.   

**Q:**  At that time, Dartsedo was the capital of the province, right?   

**A:**  No, the capital was Ya'an and Liao Zhigao was in Ya'an. Dartsedo was the capital of the Ganzi Autonomous Zhou [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ]. At that time the road was very difficult because we had to cross the Erlang Shan mountain pass. Actually, Liao Zhigao was the governor and Sangye Yeshe was the Vice Governor, so he should have accompanied the Dalai Lama and seen him off until Chamdo. We were interpreters and it was said that Sangye Yeshe would also come, but later when he got to Dartsedo, Li Jingquan sent a telegram from Sichuan saying that there is a meeting in Chengdu and he should come down, so there wasn't any high leader seeing off the Dalai Lama from Dartsedo to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  All the leaders were called to Chengdu, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It might have been about merging the two provinces together. Later Sangye Yeshe told me that he had wanted to see the Dalai Lama off to Chamdo. At the time he had never been to Chamdo. Later the highest position was Khyenrab [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ], who went to see off the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I thought this was a Chinese name.   

**A:**  No, he was Tibetan and he was with Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས]. At that time, he was a Vice Head of the Department of Organization [Tib. ཟུ་ཞི་བུ་ཕུ༹་བུ་ཞང] of the Ganzi Autonomous Zhou and the committee member of the Party Committee [Ch. dang wei] of the Autonomous Zhou. He was sent to accompany the Dalai Lama so there was a very large gap between the ranks. I respected and had faith towards the Dalai Lama and I wanted to accompany him, but I was not sent and my duty was finished. So I went back. About that, I am not sure about the opinions of the kudrak, but we, the Tibetan cadres who were party members, as well as the People's Liberation Army, said that this behavior was not good and was not respectful of [the Dalai Lama] and was not according to custom [Tib. ལུགས་སྲོལ་མེད་པ]. He [Dalai Lama] was not only a lama, but he was the Vice Chairman [Ch. fu yuan zhang].   

**Q:**  Was this an internal opinion or criticism [Tib. བསམ་འཆར]?   

**A:**  This was just chit chatting and we didn't have the guts to say what we wanted to say because we were all very low-ranking people. Among us, I was the smallest child. All of others were party members under Phünwang's underground party [Ch. di xia dang; Tib. ས་འོག་ཏང], some of them who had joined the party after the liberation. I was the only one who was not a party member. The others said that though I was a child, I was attentive and I was not playing recklessly, so they made me serve hot water and such stuff. Since we were Khambas and courageous, we would say that what Li Jingquan did was not good. The conflicts started then.   

**Q:**  Li Jingquan and those people implemented the reforms right away, right?   

**A:**  This was in June [1955]. In September, the provinces like Xikang and the others were merged together. Then they held the People's Congress of the Sichuan Province. In this meeting they confirmed that the democratic reforms should be implemented.   

**Q:**  This was in the December, right?   

**A:**  This was done too hurriedly because I heard that there were 3 documents about the reforms. There were no interpreters available because all the interpreters were in Beijing interpreting for the National People's Congress. Jagö Tomden, Ngawang Gyatso [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྒྱ་མཚོ], and Jayang Palmo [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཔལ་མོ] did not know Chinese and there wasn't a interpreter to translate the documents for the meeting.   

**Q:**  Didn't they have a document written in Tibetan?   

**A:**  They didn't. None of them were translated. They told the Southwest Nationality Institute about the documents and some people who had been interpreters, like me, were called by the Nationality Committee at night to translate it. In our school, we had a small printing house [Ch. ying shua chang] where the letters were made from lead. Kelsang Yeshe printed the documents in that printing house. After that, we also interpreted during the meeting. We didn't have the conditions like with English simultaneous interpreters. Thuwang had returned to Beijing, Phünwang was also not there, and they said that Kelsang Yeshe was not allowed to interpret because he was a landlord. Kelsang Yeshe is good at writing Tibetan and the Chinese characters, but he couldn't do verbal translation because he had the imposing character of a chief [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] or kudrak and he speaks slowly saying, "And then and then." [Tib. ཨ་ནི་སྦད་ཨ་ནི་སྦད]. So [I] became the main interpreter. When they gave the speech, I would sit next to them and interpret. Some could hear and some could not. At that time, Jagö Tomden and Jayang Palmo were the main ones who listened. Ngawang Gyatso was the abbot of Sera so didn't have any wealth to divide in the democratic reforms, so he was not that attentive. Jagö Tomden and Jayang Palmo were listening carefully. So I sat next to them and interpreted.   

**Q:**  How did they hold the meeting? Did they read the resolution about the reform from the stage?   

**A:**  Yes, they read that.   

**Q:**  Did they give explanations?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't any explanation, which is why later Chairman Mao and the Premier Zhou told them that they didn't have enough preparation [Ch. zhun bei bu gou] and went to the battlefield in a hurried manner [Ch. cang cu shang zhen]. Later, it was said that Chairman Mao said that, but Li Jingquan didn't know that he had said that and refuted this talk. He thought that Liu Shaoqi said that or that it was the idea of Li Weihan. So Li Jingquan said, "The so-called revolution was not prepared. When the GMD made war, they didn't prepare and they didn't send the message. When they came to kill us we just started the war. When the imperialists made the war in Korea, we responded right away.   

**Q:**  Did he say that openly?   

**A:**  Yes, he did. He also quoted Chairman Mao's speech, "The revolution is not a dinner party or sewing; it should be militant." [Ch. ge ming bu shi qing ke chi fan. Tib. ཐུགས་སྤྲོ་བཏང་བ་ནང་བཞིན་མ་རེད།ཚེམ་བུ་བརྒྱབ་པ་ནང་བཞེན་མ་རེད་དྲག་པོ་བྱེད་དགོས]. We could recite this by heart. At that time, Li Jingquan didn't dare oppose Chairman Mao, so he used this Chairman Mao quote while opposing another speech of Chairman Mao. At that time, they didn't have any preparation or translated document for the meeting. The document was already written and they just read it and people just raised their hands to vote on it, saying it was good.   

**Q:**  When you interpreted to Jagö Tomden and those people, what did they say?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth they didn't oppose the reforms. There was also a speech given by Jagö Tomden, a famous one, which said that he agreed and was happy with the implementation of the reforms. This was published in the Sichuan newspaper. The interpreter probably was Khyenrab who himself was also a representative. At the time they didn't think I could interpret, but actually, I was better than him. Khyenrab was capable in politics, but he was not good at interpretation. Since he was a chief, they had him interpret.   

**Q:**  Outside of the meeting, did Li Jingquan and Jagö Tomden talk to each other?   

**A:**  Li Jingquan was different from others. He acted with an imposing manner [Tib. ཉམས་བྱས] and talked a lot during the meeting. He was quite similar to Deng Xiaoping who just spoke on the points. He would make the decision with two words and they would go home and make the general secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] and the Director of the Department of the United Front discuss it. I never saw him when they were holding a discussion.   

**Q:**  Did he talk with Khamba kudraks in the United Front?   

**A:**  Yes, he did, but that was not a meeting. Tashi Tsering and Khyenrab were the interpreters. When the meeting was over, we didn't have any duty. I heard that they talked to each other.   

**Q:**  Did they read the resolution and vote on it on the same day?   

**A:**  No, it was not on the same day. They read the resolution, said that they agreed, and then raised the hands [voted on it]. The meeting was held for 7-8 days. It was said to be the People's Congress of the Sichuan Province, but mainly it was about the democratic reforms implemented in Kham and Liangshan Yi Autonomous Zhou. Later, it was said that there was to be cooperative transformation [Tib. མཉམ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་སྒྱུར་བ] and that there wasn't anything to discuss so they made the decision to implement the reforms. I didn't know of any opposition at the meeting and I didn't see any trouble. I knew some of them like the leaders of the United Front like Huang Jiquan, but I didn't have connections. They talked with Jagö Tomden and the interpreters were mostly Tashi Tsering and the Khyenrab.   

**Q:**  Some say that the Sichuan Government said that they will give [the elite] housing and pay them salaries.   

**A:**  They said that. And the Nationality Office bought the house and said that your livelihood will not be harmed and your title will remain the same. This was also written in the document and I think they didn't touch those things. I think the main cause of the trouble was not the meeting, because when the meeting was in session, there was a little bit trouble and fighting in Ganzi, Litang and Batang. At that time, for the tranquility in society, they said that they have to take over the guns. Some leaders of the Sichuan Province said that there are many guns among the masses and this was for revolting. Some comprehended this in that way. Especially, one cause of the trouble was that in August and September, they disbanded the Xikang Province. Since it was a province, there were many cadres. So when they divided them, according what I analysed, although I didn't see the document, they divided them into three groups; the best and most needed ones were sent to Sichuan Province. For example, Li Jingquan liked Liao Zhigao very much and made him the Vice Party Secretary. He later became the Governor of the Province. When Li Jingquan became the first Party Secretary of the Southwest, Liao Zhigao became the Party Secretary of the Sichaun Province. In the Cultural Revolution, there was the group of Li Liao [Ch. li liao si dang] and they held a lot of struggle sessions against them. They were the best and number one people. One group was divided into the office of the Sichuan Province so to, according to the Chinese, "Digest in the locality." [Ch. jiu di xiao hua]. These were the useless ones. The third group was sent as part of the Work Team to Ganzi, Aba [Tib. རྔ་པ] and Liangshan to implement the democratic reform. The trouble rose from this.   

**Q:**  Did Aba belong to Sichaun?   

**A:**  Yes, it belonged to Sichuan.   

**Q:**  Liangshan was also in Sichuan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when they disbanded Xikang. In Xikang, Liangshan and Xichang were two places. During the reforms, these two were merged together and Xichang was made the main capital of the Liangshan Autonomous Zhou. Xichang belonged to Xikang; Liangshan belonged to Sichuan. At that time, there were 4 counties [Tib. ས་ཁུལ]. Two Yi nationality counties that they called the Liangshan Autonomous Zhou and the Xichang county. It was like Chamdo was regarded as the local entity after the liberation. At that time, they cut the Yi Nationality and Tibetans into two pieces like cutting tofu or cake. Some Yi nationality were left in Xikang and some were sent to Sichuan. After the Cultural Revolution, they disbanded the Xikang Prefecture and made Liangshan bigger. The best of them were given good jobs in the province. The elderly, disabled, or those with other problems were left in the office in the province and the capable ones were said to have been trained and sent as part of the Work Teams to these 4 places. When they got there, they didn't have any preparations and they had not studied any policies like the nationality policy and the economic policy.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you in the Work Team?   

**A:**  No. I was just a student and cadre who belonged to Tibet Military Area Command. I didn't have anything to do with Xichang and we were just hired. They were going to implement the peaceful reforms. We would guarantee the livelihood of the people who respected the CCP, promised that their livelihood would be improved, not worsened, and planned to liberate the agricultural serfs [Tib. ཞིང་བྲན]. I agreed with this policy — we were educated by the CCP to think that these policies were correct. The trouble was caused by the Work Teams. In the document, it was written Work Team [Ch. gong zuo dui], but when they were sent down, they were called the Military or Armed [Tib. དྲག་པོའི] Work Team [Ch. wu gong dui]. This was like during the resistance against the Japanese. It was said that there were so many bandits and thieves that we had to safeguard the security and give all of the Work Team guns. So as you said, some say that I was a part of the Work Team. The meeting was over in December when I went for my vacation. The next year I was to go to Lhasa and some of my partners had already left. Then I asked for leave to go to my homeland. The motorable road only went up to Dartsedo, so I would have to walk from Dartsedo to Ba. Since I didn't dare go alone, I went with the Work Team. I was the only one who didn't have a gun, even though I was in the People's Liberation Army [laughs]. All the other non-People's Liberation Army had guns.   

**Q:**  What month was that?   

**A:**  This was the end of the February. We went to Dartsedo right before the beginning of celebration of the Tibetan New Year. It was calm. When we reached Nyagchuka [Tib. ཉག་ཆུ་ཁ], we heard that there was some trouble and in some places, there was fighting. The trouble was caused by the Work Teams as they went. As you know, there wasn't a single Khamba household without a gun. When they went to get the guns from the households, they believed that the guns were keeping the society from being tranquil. This was the start of the fighting. Some went to the monastery to get the guns and also took away the weapons like swords that had been placed in front of the protective deities. Then they [Khamba] said that this was not okay.   

**Q:**  Was this in Nyagchuka?   

**A:**  Yes, and in many other places also. I heard about that when we reached Nyagchuka, where there was a little bit of fighting going on.   

**Q:**  This was before the Tibetan New Year, right?   

**A:**  Yes, then when we reached Litang, it was the Chinese New Year [Ch. yuan dan]. I remember this clearly. They heard that we were the Work Team and were also Tibetans. I was with the Work Team going to Ba, so we were neighbors to Litang. We became guests and were told to stay in Litang and they served us good food. I remember clearly the Local Chief Maya Tusi [Ch. tu si] or Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན].   

**Q:**  Was he the same person?   

**A:**  Yes, but there was also a Yönrupön in Chamdo Tengchen [Tib. སྟེང་ཆེན]. Yönrupön in Kham was called Maya Tusi and he was not old. He was probably about 30. He was the Vice County Leader [Ch. fu xian zhang] of Litang County. He was the leader and shook hands with us and greeted us at the New Year. I met him only at that time. Then the revolt in Ba took place and in Litang, so the road was not easy to go through. We couldn't go up.   

**Q:**  Were you there when the revolt took place in Litang?   

**A:**  Yes, I was in Litang.   

**Q:**  How did the revolt start?   

**A:**  I don't know how it started. In the south, the revolt took place in Batang and Litang earliest. In the north, Ganzi and Derge were the earliest. Yönrupön was in the County Committee [Ch. xian wei] or in the government. When he was the Vice County Leader, he gave us meat and butter during the New Year and we ate grilled meat. Then the revolt took place and the monastery was shooting down and we fired cannons, but we don't know who fired the first. [laughter] I was in the Military Work Team, but didn't have a gun because I had come for a vacation.   

**Q:**  How many cadres were there with you who had guns?   

**A:**  There were about 40-50 Chinese and Tibetan people in the Work Team going up from Dartsedo, most of whom were going to Ba. I was going with them. There was a separate Work Team for Litang which had several hundred people. All of them were organized for opposing the revolt, but I used the certificate of the Youth League like a passport. I have to adhere to the discipline because if there was trouble, they would ask me where I was then. Even as a child I knew that and went to the County Committee and told them that I would do whatever they told me to do. They said, "it doesn't matter, but you have to be careful and cannot go outside at all. You should stay in the County Committee, not with the Work Team."   

**Q:**  Was the County Committee located in one house?   

**A:**  It had a big courtyard and the house was also big. The County Committee and the government were in the same courtyard. The house was simple because it was built in 1955, just after the liberation, and there wasn't a railroad or a motorable road. I was made to stay with the Party Secretaries. They said that if it became a problem, the people in the Work Team would have to go to war because they were called the Military Work Team. They said that I could stay home because I didn't have a weapon. After that, the Litang revolt was quelled. It took some time, so I didn't get to Ba during the New Year or the Chinese Spring Festival. In my lifetime, I have never celebrated the New Year in Ba.   

**Q:**  When you were in the County Committee, were there People's Liberation Army in Litang?   

**A:**  Yes, there was the Fourth Regiment [Ch. si tuan]. In the bigger counties, there was one regiment. One complete regiment had 3,000 soldiers, but the regiment was not complete then. There were two Work Teams: one in Litang and one from Ba. They guarded the courtyard. I don't know how many soldiers were there altogether, but in the courtyard, there were not many. At most, there were several hundred. I didn't see that the revolt surrounded the Litang and I didn't see them firing against them. They were just firing with the sound,"dang dang," and at night they fired machine guns. The document says that the revolt killed and robbed the people in the County Committee, but that wasn't the case. I wondered what happened because I didn't see them firing at night when I was going hither and thither in the courtyard. They didn't let all of the cadres inside go outside the courtyard and the miser didn't come in. In Litang the water had to be carried from far away.   

**Q:**  Did they stop the water?   

**A:**  When I was there, they didn't stop it. They were concerned that they might stop the water and they dug pits because the People's Liberation Army were well experienced.   

**Q:**  At that time, Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན] was at Litang, right?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't.   

**Q:**  He wrote an article. I probably misunderstood.   

**A:**  He was not there. So I saw the revolt in Litang in a strange way. It seemed that I knew something about the politics then. I went to the County Committee, otherwise, I might get asked where I was when there was trouble. So they told me not to worry and I ate with the leaders of the county.   

**Q:**  At that time, in the County Committee, did they have a feeling of tension?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They didn't say that something tense will happen. There were people playing poker and chess. The Tibetans danced and sang at night. After they fired guns, they also sang songs. In winter we ate grilled meat which was very delicious and boiled tea with the charcoal from oak trees. We drank tea and liquor with the grilled meat.   

**Q:**  How did the plane come there?   

**A:**  I went back and the fighting was quelled. They just fired at each other and nothing happened. It was said that it was calm. I was told that I could go to Ba and that the 2nd Regiment [Ch. er tuan] was going to Ba. I said "I am also going" and told them to let me go because I was a soldier and I was wearing a uniform. I took the letter and went with the soldiers. Most of the people in the Work Team also went with the troop to Ba and I didn't know some of them. The revolt hadn't taken place in Ba. I arrived probably in February, just after the New Year. Then it happened like in Litang, as there was the Ba Chöde [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ] Monastery and the County Committee. After I got to Ba, one night all of a sudden, the County Committee sent a notice saying that the Khambas were going to launch the revolt, and that all the cadres in Ba should enter the County Committee [compound]. The County Committee and government were the same. There was a big park called Dayuan built during the time of the GMD and a school. A Tibetan woman from the Chengdu Broadcast office [Tib. རྒྱང་གྲགས་ལས་ཁུངས], who later died, and I were both in Ba for vacation. We were living near the County Committee and could reach it in 10 minutes. So, when it was asked, "What shall we do? If the revolt takes place, they will kill us," the County Committee said, "You can wait for a notice. We will discuss this with the Party Committee and let you know." At night, the situation was very tense and there were a lot of gunshots. We didn't dare go to the market. The monastery became the main camp of the revolt and the County Committee became the main camp of the CCP. I just stayed in my house, on the first floor, and didn't dare go out. I had to stay like this for over 20 days. Then it was said that the revolt had killed many people and I heard that they cut off the water for the County Committee, though I didn't see it. Later, when Zhou Enlai and the Dalai Lama gave a speech, they said they stopped the water. They were just shooting at each other and I didn't hear that even one person was killed. In the big park there were some teachers of the Primary School. Then the students told the teachers, "Come over. Otherwise, the rebels will kill you." The courtyard of the County Committee was very safe. There was also a hermitage where the Ba Laga Lama stays. The hermitage was captured by the rebels or the monastery. The Chöde [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ] Monastery was here. They stayed like this for over ten days and I heard that they called the teachers and cadres to tell them that it was dangerous. They didn't have a phone, so they sent the wireless. When they went to the County Committee, three people were killed. One was the father-in-law of Tashi Tsering who was then a teacher at the primary school. It was said that the rebels killed many people, and that the soldiers came, surrounded the monastery, and fired against the rebels. I heard that they had set up the Army to Defend Buddhism [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་སྲུང་དམག] in the Chöde Monastery, with Dago Lama as the leader, and took an oath. This was the trouble, and even now I am arguing and I have some opinions. Then the People's Liberation Army came from Litang and all the rebels fled with Dago Lama. Some of them fled to the countryside, while others crossed the Yangtze River and went to Chamdo. This calmed the city down. One day after that a plane came over. This was in April when the Central Committee Delegation led by Chen Yi was just about to reach Lhasa. One day, they said a plane is coming. In the beginning, I was not that attentive. I was saying that the People's Liberation Army plane had come twice to Ba. In 1950, when we didn't have food to eat, they came before the New Year and dropped meat, peanuts, rice, flour, and dayang coins. When the plane came again, I took my late younger brother, who later died of sickness, outside for a walk. I saw that the plane had bombed the monastery. They were very careful when bombing. They had destroyed the assembly hall, but hadn't destroyed the house of Laga Lama [Tib. ལ་ག་བླ་མ].   

**Q:**  At that time, were the monks in the monastery?   

**A:**  All of them had fled and monastery was empty. This is why I am still arguing about these events. Some say that my understanding is not good. They said that they didn't bomb, but poured water. I believe my eyes about what I saw. Tashi Tsering, Khyenrab Sangye Yeshe and Yangling Dorje were not in Ba. I am the one who was in Ba. The bomb was dropped in a great way.   

**Q:**  Was it a big plane?   

**A:**  It was not a big plane and there were three planes. The three of them flew around 2-3 times and then fired machine guns. There was nobody really in the monastery — just one person, who was not killed — when they destroyed the monastery. Not only that, it took the plane two days to destroy the monastery. That's why even I am not clear on whether I was a leftist or a rightist. They can't say that it was not true, but they stopped me saying if the monks hear that, they will say that the County Committee destroyed it [monastery]. Later, when I looked at the document as it was being discussed in Chengdu, Sangye Yeshe openly said, "You should not bomb the monastery. I oppose bombing the monastery." I am wondering how they comprehend it because there was not a single person in the monastery. There wasn't any document showing that that was the idea of the government. So I am wondering how they made that mistake. I haven't seen any documents. I visited many generals and they didn't have anything to say. In the past, Tian Bao would not say much, but since he is old now, he is saying, "At that time, I opposed bombing the monastery because it is a violation of the nationality policy." So I learned that they did discuss destroying the monastery in Chengdu.   

**Q:**  At that time, Sangye Yeshe was a leader in Sichuan, right?   

**A:**  Xikang had already been disbanded, so he was the Vice Governor of Sichaun Province and the Tsugdrang of the Ganzi Autonomous Zhou.   

**Q:**  Who was the senior governor?   

**A:**  It was Li Dazhang. Li Jingquan was the Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji].   

**Q:**  In Ganzi who were the most powerful officials?   

**A:**  Fan Zhizhong and Tian Bao. Tian Bao was the Party Secretary. Then the revolt took place and they bombed the monastery and after that in April, the monastery was destroyed. I saw that very clearly. People in Ba were good at composing songs. In the past, the masses composed a song with the words, "In the happy place of Ba, we have two crops to collect and we have the monastery which is surrounded by Juniper trees to make the dharma flourish [Tib. 'ba' 'di skyid pa'i thog la/ dbyar gyi ston thog nyis rtseg/ dgon pa chos sa dar sa/ shug pa'i g,ཡས་སྐོར་བཏང་ཡོད]. After the bombardment, the masses composed a new song, "In the happy place of Ba, we have two crops to collect and we have the monastery for flourishing the dharma, but it was surrounded by bombs [Tib. འབའ་འདི་སྐྱིད་པའི་ཐོག་ལ། དབྱར་གྱི་སྟོན་ཐོག་ཉིས་རྩེག། དགོན་པ་ཆོས་ས་དར་ས། [Ch. zha dan] g.yas skor btang song]. Chöde Monastery was really like Reting Monastery as it was surrounded by Juniper trees. After that, I was called to Beijing when the Eighth Party's Congress [Tib. ཏང་གི་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་བརྒྱད་པ] was held and I was the interpreter for Wu Lanfu. I was supposed to be great because he was the second leader. This was in 1956.   

**Q:**  What month was that?   

**A:**  It was in September. When they destroyed the Ba Monastery, they didn't make war, but just bullied them and destroyed the monastery. This was what I really saw. That's why I am writing that it was wrong. After that, there were disturbances everywhere, so I went with the soldiers of the 2nd Regiment to Dartsedo and to Chengdu. At that time, Litang Monastery was also destroyed and Yönrupön was killed in the monastery. It was said that he was the main culprit of the revolt. When we first went up, he was the Vice County Leader. He shook hands with us and gave us meat. When we came down he was said to be a rebel and had been killed in the monastery. It was said that they built bunkers, but I didn't know about the monastery in detail. There were 4 monasteries bombed: Litang, Batang, Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང], Ganzi Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ], and Drango Gompa [Tib. བྲག་འགོ་དགོན་པ].   

**Q:**  In the meanwhile, the Work Team led by Liu Geping came, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was later on and then the trouble started. In Kham there was trouble. The Yi Nationality probably had many similar incidents. It was said that many people were killed, but there weren't any monasteries involved and they didn't have a religious problem. When the incidents happened in the Yi Nationality, people outside didn't know much about it. When the incident happened in Kham, people in Tibet knew about it. Some Khambas in India complained a lot, as did the GMD Taiwan, and the Cenral Committee was attentive and sent the Work Team.   

**Q:**  I heard that Tian Bao, the leader of the Yi nationality, and Tashi Tsering submitted a petition to the government. Was that true?   

**A:**  This happens to be true. The petition was submitted in Lhasa. Both of them were members of the Cenral Committee's Delegation. Tian Bao was the Vice Leader [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ་གཞོན་པ] of the Delegation and Chen Yi was the Senior Leader. There were three Vice Leaders: Zhang Jingwu, Wang Feng, and Tian Bao. Tian Bao's position was very high in 1956. I heard from Phünwang and Thuwang that the Dalai Lama told Chen Yi, "The revolt took place in Kham and many people fled to Tibet. What is this trouble about?" Then he listened carefully and Chen Yi called Sangye Yeshe and Tashi Wangchuk. At that time, there hadn't been a revolt in Qinghai, but Tashi Wangchuk's homeland was Nyarong. So Tashi Wangchuk asked, "In fact, what happened in our homeland?" Then they talked about that. They mentioned the name of the Li Jingquan and talked about how his leftist action was wrong. Li Jingquan, Li Weihan, and Chen Yi were schoolmates in France under Zhou Enlai. I heard that from their time in school together, the two Li's didn't get along well and they disagreed. Chen Yi knew about this and was very careful. He didn't report it directly, but he said that this is the opinion or criticism [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] of the Tibetan cadres. It is written like this in some Chinese documents. Actually, I think Chen Yi was a marshal and the leader of the delegation, but he didn't report it directly. So Tian Bao and Tashi Wangchuk wrote it and submitted it. So it was said there was a contradiction on this. Now we can't find that document, but two of them [Phünwang and Thuwang] told me this. Tian Bao behaved very carefully and just told the matter and would not say anything excessive. However, Tashi Wangchuk mentioned the name of Li Jingquan and criticized him, saying that Li Jingquan was wrong, that Li Jingquan was the one who didn't respect the Dalai Lama when he came to Chengdu, and that Premier Zhou scolded Li Jingquan. Then the Central Committee sent the Work Team led by Liu Geping.   

**Q:**  In October 1955, the National People's Congress was held. In June 1955, Chairman Mao gave a major speech on starting the communes, right?   

**A:**  It was not the communes. It was cooperatives [Tib. མཉམ་ལས] in 1955.   

**Q:**  After that, in October in the People's Congress, Chairman Mao gave a major speech.   

**A:**  Yes, it was called, "On Cooperative Transformation" [Ch. lun he zuo hua Tib. མཉམ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་སྒྱུར་བ].   

**Q:**  What I heard was that after that, the leaders of Xikang and Sichuan at the meeting were called by the leaders of the Nationality Committee. The leaders discussed beginning democratic reform in Sichuan. I don't remember what I read. Deng Xiaoping and Li Weihan were not there because they were doing other works. Li Geping said, "It is probably not good to implement the democratic reforms in Tibet and the nationality areas [Tib. ལུང་པ]." It was said, "We will not implement democratic reform there for the time being [Tib. གནས་སྐབས], so we will investigate. While we investigate, Li Jingquan and Fan Zhizhung should stay in Beijing. Later, we can make the decision." This was said after the meeting, during a small meeting on the nationalities. I heard that Li Jingquan was unhappy with this, so instead of him and Fan Zhizhong staying in Beijing, they went to Sichuan and held a meeting immediately to start the democratic reforms. I am wondering whether you have heard this. I think that if Liu Geping said not to do it for the time being, the leader of the Ministry of United Front, Li Weihan, would agree. Li Jingquan was the first leader of Sichuan, so I don't believe that Li Jingquan was so unattentive and still implemented the reform right away. I think Li Jingquan needed a person to back him. If you wonder who would back him, there is only Deng Xiaoping. But Li Weihan and Deng Xiaoping didn't get along well internally, right?   

**A:**  It was as you said. Regarding the implementation of the democratic reforms, Liu Geping himself talked to me about this when I was his interpreter in Chengdu as they were discussing the reforms in Tibet and Kham in 1955. He said, "Now, the condition are not satisfactory so we have to implement the peaceful reforms."   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  This was in 1956. The Dalai Lama came from Chengdu in June. Liu Geping's wife, called Dengli, and the cadres were all in Beijing, but he didn't go to Beijing. He took his clerk and went to Yunnan to investigate the implementation of the democratic reforms through peaceful means. When he came back from the investigation, it was discussed. It was said, "it is good to implement the reforms in the minority nationalities through peaceful means because our country has been stabilized [Tib. ལྷིང་འཇགས]. It is different from the period before the liberation, and now we can implement the reform peacefully." Wu Lanfu supported his idea and Li Weihan probably agreed with him. Peaceful reforms was not his idea. It was the Central Committee's decision, and so he said that the Central Committee's decision was correct. Then Sichuan said that they were going to implement the reform. Sometimes, Chairman Mao spoke from both sides. The Minister of Agriculture [Tib. ཞིང་ལས་བུ] Deng Zihui had the same rank as Li Weihan, and Deng Zihui was also the Vice Premier [Ch. zong li; Tib. གཞོན་པ] of the State Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང]. He was one of the highest leaders on agriculture in the Party. Deng Zihui was scolded as a woman with bound feet [Tib. ྾ཨིཨཨོ་ཇིཨཨོ་ནུ་རེན].   

**Q:**  Oh! yes, this was said by Chairman Mao. On one side he said that we should be careful, but on the other side he said that Deng Zihui was woman with bound feet. This had the different interpretation. This was a long speech given by Chairman Mao, but in short he said that it is not suitable to implement the democratic reforms in Tibet.   

**A:**  I don't know whether he said this internally.   

**Q:**  He didn't talk about the Khambas. He said it was little bit different.   

**A:**  He says things from both sides. As you said, the democratic reforms were finished even in the northwest areas such as Xinjiang. Mainly it was unfinished in the Tibetan areas in Sichuan, Gansu, and Yunnan. Liu Geping said that it would be better to do it slowly and agreed with the Ministry of the United Front. Li Jingquan said that he wanted to implement the democratic reform in Kham and he was told to bring over the documents regarding the preparations. At that time there was both the Ministry of United Front and the Ministry of Countryside Work [Tib. གྲོང་གསེབ་ལས་དོན་བུ]. The Minister of Countryside Work was Deng Zihui. These two ministries called their people and told them that. In that meeting, there was no talk that Li Jingquan was there. Li Weihan and Deng Zihui were also not there. Liu Geping was mainly in charge of the Ministry of United Front and Liao Zhigao was there from Sichuan. Liao Zhigao was the second powerful person there. They said that they wanted to implement the democratic reforms and were told to bring the plan and the documents. They didn't bring them. They wouldn't dare to go back to the meeting and they wouldn't dare call the meeting recklessly. When Liu Geping called them, it is definite that the Central Committee approved it. Otherwise, they were not allowed to call the meeting. They didn't go back and they were told to bring the plan. This was in October. At that time, Chairman Mao was criticizing the mistakes of the rightists and it was said that main problem is the rightists saying it is a small step. Then they became more courageous and then they didn't report about the document for the democratic reforms to the Ministry of the United Front and started doing the reforms and read the documents of the reforms in December. At that time, Deng Xiaoping was the General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] of the Central Committee. The 6th National Assembly of the Party Secretaries [Ch. shu ji chu] [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་དྲུག་པ] was yet to be held. Li Jingquan definitely reported this, but we don't know to whom he reported. Deng Xiaoping didn't get along well with Li Weihan from the beginning when they were in France.   

**Q:**  What happened to Li Weihan's wife?   

**A:**  Li Weihan took away Deng Xiaoping's wife.   

**Q:**  Was this when they were in France?   

**A:**  No, when they were in France, Deng Xiaoping was a child. Now they are making a movie of it. At the time, he was printing the documents on wax paper. Li Weihan had become a leader already. When they came back and joined the revolution, in Jiangxi he was the Party Secretary of the County Committee in Ruijin. The position was not high, but at that time, the Central Committee of the CCP was in Ruijin. So he was like the Party Secretary of the County Committee in Beijing. When they reorganized the party [Ch. gai zu], he [Deng?] said that he did not respect [Tib. བརྩི་བཀུར] Mao Zedong, so they held a struggle session against Deng Xiaoping [He was in disgrace]. His wife said that she would divorce him and went to live with Li Weihan. When his wife came to Yan'an, she went to the Soviet Union. She might have regretted this as she went mad and died. The Chinese regarded taking away someone's wife as very bad, saying that the killer of your parents is the main enemy and the next is the one who takes away one's wife.   

