# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Graz, Austria  
**Date of Interview:** November 1996  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated entirely into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He later became an important translator and more recently a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In this interview, Jambey Gyatso talks about Chairman Mao's speech on the transformation of agricultural practices into co-operatives and about how Li Jingquan submitted a report for implementing the reforms in Kham that led to the revolt. He tells about merging the two provinces of Sichuan and Xikang, how the Work Teams went to collect guns from monasteries, but the monasteries didn't let them in. He also tells how Liao Zhigao selected some people and sent them to the Sichuan People's Assembly and what happened at the meeting which passed the resolution to implement reforms in Kham. Additionally, he talks about how the Sichuan Party Committee stopped doing the reforms in 1957, but started again 1958.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_03/H_0060_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time, you told me about the trouble in Kham. I heard a lot about how in December 1955, in Chengdu, a meeting was held, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the People's Congress [Tib. མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  I heard that before that in Beijing, the Nationality Affairs Committee [Tib. མི་རིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] held a meeting regarding the refors in Sichuan. Have you heard about that? I heard that all the leaders of Xikang and ones like Song Renzhong, Wu Lanfu, Liu Geping, Wang Feng, Li Jingquan, and other people like Fan Zhizhong, went to Beijing and they submitted a report in which it was written that they were willing to implement the reforms. They could not make a decision at the meeting about this. The Nationality Affairs Committee said that "You shouldn't make the decision to do this right away. You should investigate whether it will work or not." At that point, Li Jingquan and Fan Zhizhong didn't accept that and they said that they were going to leave (Beijing). Have you ever heard about this?   

**A:**  It was probably not like that. What I heard was that the meeting was held later on. In 1955, there was a problem [Tib. རྙོག་དྲ] in Tibet all of a sudden. That is what you are talking about. One problem occurred in 1955. That was befor, when it was called Xikang Province. At that time, Liao Zhigao and Fan Zhizhong were the leaders of Xikang Province. Li Jingquan and Li Dazhang were the leaders of Sichuan Province. In July-August 1955, the Party meeting was held [in Beijing] and it was said that we should implement the transformation to co-operatives [Ch. he zuo hua yun dong]. In one of Chairman Mao's important speeches, he talked about the co-operative transformation of agriculture [Ch. guan yu nong ye he zuo hua wen ti]. This was known as the most elaborate speech Chairman Mao had given since the PRC was founded in 1949. Even when the Congress of the Communist Party [Tib. ཏང་གི་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན] and the People's Congress were held, Chairman Mao never gave that kind of elaborate speech. He just gave the opening speech [Ch. kai mo ci] and talked about the points. The other lectures were given by Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai and Deng Xiaoping. At that time, when it was said that the entire nation should implement the co-operative transformation, some people criticized that it was too slow. Therefore, it was decided to speed up and conclude the co-operative transformation of agriculture in Sichuan in 1956. That was not only for Sichuan, it was done in the entire nation. Before that, there were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང] Type of cooperative production unit started in 1960-61 as a precursor to full communes. In farm areas, it consisted of 5-6 poorer families who would be joined with one or two better off families who would then cooperate in all aspects of farming, although each family would keep all of its yield.">Mutual Aid Team</a> [Tib. རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང]. The problem was that in Kham, the democratic reform was not implemented. That was in Xikang. In Chinese, it was called [Ch. san zhou yi di], which means three autonomous prefectures; the Ngagpa Autonomous Prefecture, the Ganzi Autonomous Prefecture, and the Liangshan Yi Nationality Autonomous Prefecture. And one district [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ་གསུམ་དང་ས་ཁུལ་གཅིག]. The one district was Xichang. That was the place from where the satellite was launched. It was remote, but a good place. These four were the minority nationality districts under Sichuan Province. In those places, the democratic reform was not yet implemented, so it was impossible to have the co-operatives. At that time, when it was said that the co-operative transformation of agriculture should be implemented, it included Xikang. In 1956, Sichuan Province and Xikang Province were merged together. That was called [Ch. liang sheng he bi] in Chinese.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1955. At that time, the leader of Sichuan Province was Li Jingquan and the leader of Xikang Province was Liao Zhigao. He became the third Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji] in Sichuan Province, but at that time, he [actually] became more powerful because he could meddle in the matters of Sichuan also. I met him, but I never talked with him. He was an eloquent and capable person. After the Cultural Revolution, he became the Party Secretary of Fujian and died.   

**Q:**  At that time, they were able to start implementing the co-operative transformation in Sichuan, but when they had to do it in the nationality districts, I guess they had to report to the Central Government, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The problem with what you mentioned occurred at that point. To tell you the truth, they probably didn't have much concept [Tib. འདུ་ཤེས] of the nationality. When they were told to implement that, they submitted a plan regarding the implementation to the United Front Ministry [Ch. tong zhan bu] in 1955. As soon as they submitted the report, they started implementing the reforms before they got permission. In Chinese it is called [Ch. tong bu jing xing], which means reporting and implementing at the same time. According to the system of the CCP, they were allowed do that even in the present time when there are some special important matters and if the person is courageous to think that it is right to do it. Usually, for example, people had to report when they had to teach the Gesar Story, they had to seek permission and teach. At that time, they did not consider it an important matter because they were brave. Like this, the trouble occurred in Kham. When they implemented the reforms in Kham, they went to take away [Tib. འཕྲོག] the guns and do something with the religion. People were talking a lot saying that the People's Congress of the CCP was not a real democracy and they didn't elect the representatives. But, outwardly, all of the 29 provinces were electing their representatives. However, at that time, Sichuan Province didn't elect their representatives. Therefore, Liao Zhigao just nominated such and such people and called them. I was in Chengdu as the representative of Xikang Province and there were 10 people. At that time, we didn't have any document [about the reforms] and I was just a student at the Institute of Nationalities. I belonged to Tibet and was one of about 20 students who had been sent from Tibet to Chengdu to study. So we were not prepared for the document at the meeting and we didn't have an interpreter. When we told them that we didn't understand   

**Q:**  Was the meeting about the nationalities?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. That was the second session [Tib. གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཏེངས་གཉིས་པ] of the First People's Congress of Sichuan Province.   

**Q:**  How many Tibetans attended the meeting?   

**A:**  There were all the famous people like Jagö Tomden, Jayang Palmo [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཔལ་མོ], the Derge Queen. And there was Derge Sey [Tib. སྲས] who sometimes went with the Tibetans in Chamdo and sometimes came with the [Tibetans in] Sichuan. There was an abbot of Sera and there were also some from the Yi nationality. Altogether, there were over 20 [minority] people. After the meeting started, they approved a resolution saying that the democratic reforms shall be implemented in the Kham area. The draft of the resolution was written in Chinese and they just made the people raise their hands. At that time, I was among the people who knew Tibetan the best. There were many scholars in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> whose Tibetan was very good. But, they didn't prepare [Tibetan language materials] for those people to attend the meeting.   

**Q:**  Usually, they would make some teams and let people discuss in the teams .   

**A:**  At that time, the situation was too tense because Sichuan Province was a very big province. When they held meetings in Xikang Province, they were definitely being like that because there were minority nationalities. But, in Sichuan, they didn't have that kind of concept. At present, the population of Sichuan is over one hundred million and only 1% is Tibetan. Back then, the population was about 5-6 million, but it was still the highest population in the entire country. There were 1,000 Chinese [at the meeting] and 20 Tibetans and about 10 Yi, so they didn't have the concept for making discussion teams. In Beijing they had that, but it was confirmed to implement the refors and the resolution was made. After the resolution was drafted in Chinese, the 1,000 Chinese raised their hands saying it was good.   

**Q:**  I also heard that there was trouble with the leaders of Sichuan, like the trouble of Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming, and that the leaders of the Xikang were kind of leftist and they suggested that they should implement the reforms in that area just like they did in inland China. But, Li Jingquan made a decision that was kind of lenient [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] where they didn't hold the class struggle [sessions], and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were given money and their houses were built and the reform was done leniently and they paid them salaries and didn't hold struggle sessions, was that correct?   

**A:**  I don't know about the internal contradiction. In Chengdu, those people were the soldiers under Liu Bochen and Deng Xiaoping, and Li Jingquan came from the north. He was not under Deng Xiaoping. He was under Peng Dehuai and they came along with three armies [Ch. jun] of soldiers and they were called the 18th Bingtuan or large military units. They were led by He Long. It was said that Li Jingquan and Deng Xiaoping had a good, private relationship. Regarding the problem [Tib. རྙོག་དྲ] that you are talking about, they submitted the report in 1955 and the reform was implemented at the end of 1955 and start of 1956. They held a meeting in December 1955 and at the time of the Spring Festival, the Chinese New Year, though they didn't have the name <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, but Ganzi Targye Monastery, Litang Monastery, Chantreng Monastery, and Ba Chöde Monastery all rose up.   

**Q:**  When did they first start that?   

**A:**  That was in January 1956.   

**Q:**  Did the Litang revolt occur first or the Batang one?   

**A:**  It is difficult to say who was the first. I guess there was just a few days difference because Litang and Batang were joint. Chantreng was the homeland of Trijang Rimpoche. So they blamed Trijang saying he was their backer. I think he didn't have any direct relations with them. Trijang came to attend the National People's Congress meeting [in Beijing] in 1954 and in 1956, Tian Bao and those people submitted the report to the Central Committee saying that we shouldn't accuse him like that.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there people other than Tian Bao?   

**A:**  Tian Bao. And there was a Yi nationality person, and Tashi Wangchug of Sichuan was also among the people making the report. After that, Liu Geping went down as [part of] a Work Team. I was the interpreter for Liu Geping. He was a very aggressive person. Before he died, we were talking about him. He was scolding Li Jingquan saying that he was a leftist and he was wrong. But, after that, he had some problem because although he [Liu Geping] was getting along very well with Chairman Mao, he didn't get along well with Liu Shaoqi. Therefore, he suffered a lot. At that time, he told me personally that when he went to make the report to Chairman Mao and Zhou Enlai and the two of them told him that his opinion was correct. After that, Xikang was demolished [merged] and they called the people from Sichuan to hold a meeting in Beijing and they said that their opinion was wrong. And they said that we were right to do the revolution [reforms] and they had launched the revolt. Liu Geping told them that their policy was wrong. At that time, Deng Xiaoping and Li Weihan were also not getting along well. They had a kind of private grudge from the past. Li Jingquan had good relations with Deng Xiaoping. When Liu Geping confronted [Tib. ཐུག] Sichuan Province, it was hard for Li Weihan to say something so he said, "Both sides are right and both sides should be careful. Liu Geping is a minority nationalit person, so it is right for him to say that we should be careful. It was right for Sichuan Province to launch the revolution [Tib. གསར་རྗེ]. You should launch the revolution. However, what Liu Geping said, that we should pay attention to the policy and to the characteristics of the nationality, and that what the Han Chinese did was wrong, that was also correct." In 1956, they held many meetings like that. After that, because of the troubles in Russia, Poland and Czechoslovakia and because the Dalai Lama went to India, Chairman Mao said that the reforms would not be implemented for 6 years [in Tibet]. Do it in Sichuan, but don't do it in Tibet.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, the reforms were implemented, but later, did they become a little bit lenient [Tib. ལྷོད] in dealing with the monasteries?   

**A:**  Yes, that was because of the opinions of Liu Geping saying do not collect the fields that belonged to the monasteries. Regarding collecting guns, it was said that Liu Geping's opinion was correct and implementing the reform was also correct. The reform should be implemented. But, they hadn't done enough on the religious side. For example, it was said that all the guns should be collected. That was the trouble that arose during that time. According to the CCP's point of view, collecting guns was an appropriate thing because people were not allowed to keep guns. But, in the Kham area, guns were not bought for the revolt against the CCP. They had the guns from earlier times. At that time, they said that they should pay for the cost of the guns and they also said to not collect the guns placed at the protective deity's temple because those guns didn't have bullets. At that time, the Sichuan Province Committee was not accepting that it was wrong to collect the guns and they said that we shouldn't say that we bought the guns. On this matter, Sichuan Province was not giving up [Tib. གློད]. So it was said to give some tea bricks and cloth for the guns. If a reactionary had fired guns on the CCP, their guns could be collected. But at that time, they had to collect the guns before they used them against the CCP. At that time, Liu Geping said that we had to pay the cost [Tib. དོད] of the gun. But, Li Jingquan was very stubborn and he never accepted that it was wrong. He said, "When the Central Committee told us to pay tea for the guns, we paid the tea." At that time, it was said that the steps should be taken faster and the co-operative transformation of agriculture should be concluded in 1956. But even the [basic land] reform were not done, so it was impossible to implement the co-operative transformation. First, they had to implement the reforms.   

**Q:**  When did the co-operatives start in the Kham area?   

**A:**  They started in 1955 and they had problems in 1956, and they stopped doing that in 1957 and then started doing it in 1958. Therefore, there was a little bit of reason why the unrest took place in Lhasa in 1959. In 1958, People's Communes [Tib. མི་དམངས; Ch. gong she] were set up in the entire nation, so the Kham area could not remain as before. So they had to move a little bit.   

**Q:**  In 1958, there was a large-scale revolt, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I don't know if they held the meeting before 1955. What I heard was that after that, some people ran away to India, so in 1956 when the meeting was held after the reforms [in Beijing], when they were told that they were not prepared to do them, they said that they had all the documents and they [Sichuan] said that they reported to the Central Committee and also submitted the documents, and the Central Committee didn't say that doing this was not right.   

**Q:**  I heard that they were not called specially to Beijing. The representative of Sichuan and Xikang were attending the National People's Congress and at that time, and they talked about that because it was related to the nationalities.   

**A:**  Yes, this is possible.   

**Q:**  I heard that Li Jingquan said that for making the kudraks feel relaxed, he told them that "Even if your lands were to be confiscated, we would build a big building in Chengdu and you can live in that building. And we will pay you a salary and you won't have any financial problems," is that correct?   

**A:**  This was the policy. They also [actually] built the building for this and nowadays, the building is used as a reception house of the Sichuan Nationality Office [Tib. མི་རིགས་ལས་ཁུངས] in Chengdu. It was built like family apartments instead of like rooms in a guest-house. Nowadays, the Lama Kathog Shinkyong [Tib. ཀ་ཐོག་ཞིང་སྐྱོང] lives in that guest-house of Sichuan Province.   

**Q:**  Did they build the building for them?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, did they actually tell the Tibetans that they would pay them high salaries?   

**A:**  Yes, they told them and I was the interpreter. When we went there, the building was under construction. In 1955, they held the meeting and built the building. We were the first people living in that building because we had to work as the interpreters. We were students from the Northwest Nationalities Institute.   

**Q:**  I also heard that when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> leaders were called to the meeting in Chengdu, they were told that they were not allowed to go home. Hence, they sent their servants home and sent the message that they should prepare for war, and the war started.   

**A:**  They didn't move into that building, they were made to stay in a guest-house. We didn't stay in the house. I don't know about that. But, in our CCP documents, it was written that they [Khambas] had launched the revolt and they didn't go back, but they sent their relatives. At that time, Jagö Tomden was the representative of the Chengdu attending the People's Congress. He was the vice leader of the Autonomous Prefecture. He and the Derge Queen's sons were arrested. I have never seen the son of Jagö Tomden, but I have seen the son of the Derge Queen. Later, he was released and worked in the Nationality Administrative Committee [Tib. མི་རིགས་དོན་བྱེད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. He died all of a sudden the year before last year when he went to Lhasa for a pilgrimage. He was arrested when he was about 20 years old. He told me that he was just fond of women and he was show-offish, riding horses, but he didn't do anything in the revolt. It was written in our documents that they sent those people, but it is difficult to say whether they launched the revolt or not. After the meeting was held, from the end of November till December, they didn't let representatives like Jagö Tomden and those people go back home. That was true. After the meeting was over, I didn't meet them and I didn't know where they were. I was a soldier and I was 16-17 years old. The rules of the Army were strict, so I never did what was not allowed and didn't meet people when they told me that I was not allowed to. At that time, I asked whether we were allowed to go back to the school. We were given good food and nobody was taking care of us for a month. When they didn't let the representatives go home, nobody was taking care of their children and their servants. So they might have been sent back or they ran away.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, when they rose up in revolt, did they rise up just like that, or did they rise up when they came to collect the guns? Some people said that when the Work Team came to collect the guns, that is when they made the war?   

**A:**  I guess the situation was different in each place. I don't know how they fought in Ganzi. However, in Litang and Ba, for example, when they heard that the Work Team would be sent to the monasteries, the monasteries told them that they didn't need to come. The main trouble arose in the monastery. There was a vice county leader [Ch. fu xian zhang] of Litang called Banag Tusi [Ch. tu si], or pön. He was in his thirties and I heard that he was very aggressive. He took ten-some riders with him and went to the monastery and said that he would help protect the monastery. Later, he was killed over there. When the Work Team said that they were going to go to the monasteries in Ba and Litang, they said that they didn't need them to go and they closed the door of the monasteries.   

**Q:**  At that time, what was the work of the Work Team?   

**A:**  They were implementing the reforms, collecting the guns and holding struggle sessions. They were very powerful because there wasn't the government at the lower level. They were the main representatives of the CCP and the People's Liberation Army implementing the land reform and they were called the "Land Reform Work Team [Ch. tu gai gong zuo dui]". So at that time, the arrival of the Work Team was the same as changing the political power. At that time, the monasteries knew about the CCP and about Phüntso Wangyel, so they said that "You don't need to come to the monastery. In the past, you had said that we should implement the reforms through consultation so we can consult with you. If the soldiers come, that would be brazen bullying [Tib. ཧམ་པ་དབང་ཡོད]." Therefore, the government used that as a pretext and sent troops to suppress them. That was really stupid. How could they stop them.   

**Q:**  When the Work Team came and the monks said that the they were not allowed to come and the soldiers bombed the monastery, how long did it take during that time?   

**A:**  It took about several months.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were in Batang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you go for a vacation?   

**A:**  When they bombed the monastery I was in Ba. But when they stopped the Work Team, I was not there. At that time, it was kind of strange. The person who provoked the revolt in Ba was Bagu Lama. He is still in Batang. He had relations with the Guomindang in Chongqing.   

**Q:**  Last time, you told me his name and I went to find him Lhasa, but I couldn't find him.   

**A:**  He is a committee member [Ch. wei yuan] in the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་གྲོས]. I heard that nowadays he has come to Ba. I don't have much relations with him because he was a high lama.   

**Q:**  Did the bomb hit the main monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there monks in there?   

**A:**  They probably knew that the monastery was going to be bombed. So I guess there weren't many people who died in the bombardment. As I told you before, after working as an interpreter, I stayed about one month in the leader's house and then I went to the school. After that, I didn't dare go to Ba after the liberation because I was in the army. Hence, I took leave during winter vacation and went there.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was in January in 1956. I went there before the Chinese New Year. I was supposed to go to my homeland for the New Year at that time, but the revolt took place and there weren't vehicles. So I spent my New Year in Litang.   

**Q:**  When you arrived in Litang, had the bombardment taken place?   

**A:**  No, it hadn't. At that time, the Work Team was not allowed in the monastery and they also didn't go. I guess that was a kind of policy. At that time, the revolt hadn't taken place and I was in the People's Liberation Army and I had to stand on the CCP side. I was discharged from the People's Liberation Army in 1958. Before that, usually, I was not wearing the Army uniform, but my salary was paid from the military service. When I went to Litang, the Work Team was staying in the County Committee [Ch. xian wei; Tib. ཛོང་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. They were just studying and saying if they couldn't get into the monastery, they couldn't get to other places.   

**Q:**  Were they making the masses study?   

**A:**  They were studying by themselves. Actually, they had to go to monastery and then go to the countryside, but they knew that if they couldn't go to the monastery, it would be useless to go to the countryside. They knew the monastery was the leading force.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  That was because the masses were looking at the Monastery. At that time, I celebrated the New Year with cadres in the Work Team.   

**Q:**  Was that the Chinese New Year?   

**A:**  Yes, it was the Spring Festival [Ch. chun jie].   

**Q:**  Was that on the first of January?   

**A:**  That was the New Year [Ch. yuan dan] celebrated commonly [Tib. སྤྱི་པ]. The Chinese New Year was called the Spring Festival, that was like Farmer's New Year.   

**Q:**  That was similar to the Tibetan New Year, right?   

**A:**  In those days, in the Kham area within the Yangtze River, they were not celebrating the Tibetan New Year. They were celebrating the Chinese New Year. At that time, we had three New Years; the New Year on the 1st of January was brought in by you people in Europe, the Tibetan New Year was celebrated in Tibet and the Chinese Farmer's New Year.   

**Q:**  Was that in the February?   

**A:**  Yes, something like that. Anyway it was not in January. I remember that the weather was very cold. At that time, I was a soldier, so I just had some money for buying some gifts for my homeland. When the Work Team knew about that, they told me not to use my money and they gave me food, and they also gave me some meat tin foods, which was regarded very highly then, and I took them to Ba.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did the Work Team tell you? Did they say there was a problem but they [Work Team] were enthusiastic?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth. At that point, I was thinking that they should be enthusiastic and launch the revolution and liberate the people. What the monastery did was wrong.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you think about destroying the religion or about dividing the land?   

**A:**  At that point, we didn't have any idea regarding the culture and the religion. We were thinking about implementing the land reforms. At that time, Chairman Mao's speech was also given on the co-operative transformation of agriculture. So if we didn't implement the land reform, how could we implement the transformation to co-operatives. We were not thinking about the nationality, culture and religion, and about Sino-Tibetan relation.   

**Q:**  If the monastery didn't have lands, how could the monks manage their livelihoods?   

**A:**  At that moment, let alone people like us, even the leaders were also not considering those matters. When I think about that nowadays, it had been really strange. Most of the monks in the monastery were poor. So if the reform were to be implemented, that would have been beneficial for them. But they were opposing it. To tell you the truth, when they destroyed the monastery, I thought that it was not a good thing. I also told the leader of the County Committee, but they were looking down on me because I was a soldier and they were looking at me like a kid. When I asked them "Why are you bombing the monastery? Who made that decision? This is not good. In the future, we can set up schools or hospitals in the monastery." At that moment the Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji] of the County was thinking that I had some requests for my homeland and he asked, "Is there anything else that we can help you with?" He was just not attentive regarding what I told him. Actually, I regarded the matter as very important and went to report him. But he was thinking that I was talking about my private matter and told me "Do you have any problems at home? If you have problems, we will help you." I told him, "I don't have any problem at home. I purposely came to report this matter."   

**Q:**  Was he Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, he just looked down on me like a kid.   

**Q:**  Did the people in Ba like the reforms or not?   

**A:**  Most of the people liked the reforms.   

**Q:**  What about when they destroyed the religion?   

**A:**  At that time, according to my personal point of view, people were not thinking so much about that. In Chinese, the land reform was called [Ch. tu gai]. The democratic reform means using the democratic way for doing the land reforms. In China, they held the struggle sessions against the landlords. But it was said that they would not hold struggle sessions against the landlords in Tibet. At that time, they were just saying they were going to change the system. To tell you the truth, at that time, regarding the religious faith, there were lamas having women and doing business. Hence, I was thinking most of the lamas were bad. According to my personal view, most of the people were accepting the reforms.   

**Q:**  So, you think that bombing the monastery was wrong, right?   

**A:**  Yes, even now, I don't know what the purpose for bombing the monastery was.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama heard about the bombing, he was extremely shocked.   

**A:**  Later, Li Jingquan told a lie saying they didn't bomb the monastery. Let alone others, I saw it with my eyes. Even nowadays, I saw the document for the meeting then. It was written that when they asked Liu Geping if they had bombed the monastery and he was asked whether he went there, he said that he didn't go there. I just heard this from other people. Then they asked him if he believed whatever people said. When the Guomindang was saying that [we] would rape the women and kill the people, do you believe that also?   

**Q:**  Li Jingquan was really tough [Tib. གྱོང་པོ] to have lied like that, right?   

**A:**  In 1956, Premier Zhou went to India twice and talked with the Dalai Lama three times. I heard that later Nehru made public the document regarding their talks in their Congress - you probably got the document. You should do research on that.   

**Q:**  I can't get anything from the Indian government.   

**A:**  Recently, I saw the Chinese version of the document. In that document, the Dalai Lama said, "You have bombed the . That is not good." Premier Zhou said, "It was not bombed. You just listened to a rumor made by the reactionaries." He probably believed what Li Jingquan had reported.   

**Q:**  What did Nehru do?   

**A:**  I saw in a Chinese document that in 1959, in their Congress, Nehru announced the minutes of the talks between the Dalai Lama and Premier Zhou and the talks between Nehru and Zhou on the Tibetan issue, and on the future of Tibet. Zhou Enlai accepted complete [Tib. གཙང་མ] autonomy. But, the content of the announcement was not written in that.   

**Q:**  Maybe I got the document that Nehru spoke about at their Congress because I was writing about that in 1956. I didn't get the document about the Zhou Enlai's talk.   

**A:**  They [Indians] were saying that Zhou Enlai did not keep his promise [Tib. ཁ་དན་ཚིག་ལ་མ་གནས]. What he promised was complete autonomy.   

**Q:**  He probably talked about not implementing the reforms, right?   

**A:**  The minute I saw was it made by our people and that it was written that Zhou Enlai said it was not bombed -   

**Q:**  In Dharamsala, they have a lot of documents. I think that what he promised was not to implement the reforms.   

**A:**  That was announced all over the world.   

**Q:**  I heard that in 1957-58 there was a nationality problem [Tib. རྙོག་དྲ] in Qingdao and after that, Phünwang had his problems. What actually happened at that time? Jagö Tomden said we want Derge to be given to Tibet. Do you know anything about that?   

**A:**  You can ask this to Phünwang himself. In 1957, a meeting was held in Qingdao regarding the works for the nationalities. Later, the speech atn that meeting was actually distributed in 1980. The meeting was held mainly when they opposed the rightists and they said that in the minority areas there was local nationalism [Tib. ས་གནས་མི་རིགས་རིང་ལུགས] and we should oppose it. It was started from that time. But at that point, they probably didn't mention particular people to be opposed. Later, Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས] said, "We, Derge and Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ] are becoming two parts. At the best, please merge Derge to Chamdo. If not, please merge Jomda to Derge, and I am also coming." I heard that opinion was not told formally. They didn't do anything to Derge Sey. Later, some people who didn't like Phünwang said, "Phünwang was trying to establish a large autonomous areas like in the Soviet Union." I don't know the English and I can't translate the term into Tibetan. In Chinese it was said [Ch. lian bang] federal or commonwealth. That was like the Soviet Union ('s "republics"). And it was said that Phünwang had advocated the so-called "Greater Tibet [Tib. བོད་ཆེན་པོ]". In 1957, they didn't say anything. But, in 1958, when they criticized Phünwang, they told him that he had said that in 1957. But Phünwang said that he didn't say that. At that time, they told Phünwang, "You made Derge Sey come out and say that the two Derges on two sides of the river should be merged together. You were tricky and you were doing that to test for a Greater Tibet like raising a balloon for the test." Actually, they didn't say anything to Derge Sey.   

**Q:**  Now I get it. Before that I had heard about that history, but I didn't know the relations.   

**A:**  In 1958, they didn't do anything to Phünwang. They accused Phünwang about the republics in 1980 also. He was always saying that he didn't say that. At that time, they told Phünwang "The people living abroad were saying that they want Greater Tibet, and you have been proving that according to Marxism."   

**Q:**  In 1951-52, you were staying in Lhasa. At that time, Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan had many quarrels [Tib. rstod pa] with the Tibetan government. At that time, there were troubles on one side with the two sitsab. But, I think at that time, when the Central Committee was sending telegraphs and passing down documents from Beijing, they were always telling them not to create troubles and to do things slowly and make friends with everybody. They indeed made friends and went to visit some families and gave alms to the monks. But on the other hand, they [Chinese] were acting like an opponent [Tib. ཁ་གཏད] in a very aggressive manner. I wonder why they were doing that. Actually, the order from the Central Government was kind of clear, right?   

**A:**  I also have the same feeling. At that time, Chairman Mao was telling them to do that. But the subordinates like Zhang Jingwu were acting aggressively. He didn't like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> at all in terms of a private relationship. According to my point of view, Zhang Jingwu was using a lot of strength to overthrow [Tib. དབྱུགས] Lukhangwa. And Fan Ming didn't like the Dalai Lama and he was raising up the Panchen Lama. In terms of private relations, Zhang Guohua probably had a good relationship with the Dalai Lama. Later, when I met the wife and the clerk of Zhang Guohua, I knew that Zhang Guohua didn't say anything bad to the Dalai Lama. Even when he had to talk about that, he just said the high ranking reactionary league of Tibet [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་གོང་རིམ་ལོག་སྤྱོད་ཤོག་ཁ]. I didn't know in the past, but later when I saw the documents and when I talked with his wife and his clerk, I knew about that. I think maybe the Central Committee was acting double-headed or the subordinates were doing reckless things.   

**A:**  At that time, it was also said that the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. dmag srsid u yon lhan khang] could be set up right then or it could also be postponed. Back then, Zhang Jingwu gave a party to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>. Lukhangwa didn't come personally and sent a substitute. Zhang Jingwu became agitated and said, "In history, there have been people sending people as substitutes to attend meetings, but I have never heard about sending a substitute to a party."   

**Q:**  That was not a policy and it was done by the subordinates, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was a problem caused by individuals. According to my point of view, at that time, Chairman Mao was kind of broad-minded. Actually, it had been two months since the war in Chamdo took place, so there was no need to sign the agreement and there was no need to violate [Tib. བརྩི་མེད] the agreement after it was signed. So, I visited the Panchen Lama and I am also visiting many other elderly people.   

