# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, , China (Tibet Autonomous Region)  
**Date of Interview:** 16 May 2006  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He subsequently became a translator and cadre and later a researcher/author in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In this interview, he discusses how Wu Lanfu and Liu Geping were sent to Kham with a Work Team and how Mao met with Liu Geping before he left. He talks about how Li Jingquan was promoted to Committee Member of the Politburo but how Li Weihan fell out of favor. He also talks about how Mao agreed with Tian Bao to delay the implementation of reforms in the monestaries, the 14 article policy, his work as an interpreter for the Dalai Lama, as well as the Dalai Lama’s opinion of the reforms. Finally, he discusses the appointment of Tian Bao as the Ganzi Party Secretary and the demotion of Fan Zhizhong, the movement of opposing the rightists, and Liu Geping’s arrival back in Beijing.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_06/H_0060_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  When he went to report to the Central Committee's Ministry of the United Front, Deng Xiaoping was the General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ]. He said that he was not going and I heard that the two Vice Ministers, Wu Lanfu and Liu Geping, were sent. They were confirmed to go, since Chairman Mao and Li Weihan were fellow countrymen and Li Weihan got along well with Premier Zhou. When Li Weihan had to report to Mao and Zhou, he would go to the Party Secretariate [Ch. shu ji chu], otherwise, he wouldn't go to the Secretariate. Usually, Liu Geping said that he would not go there because he was a vice minister, but the reason why he went there might have involved some special matters. [meaning unclear]   

**Q:**  Li Weihan stayed back, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he stayed back.   

**Q:**  Did Chairman Mao himself make the decision to send Liu Geping with the Work Team?   

**A:**  This was decided by Chairman Mao and before Liu left, Mao also met with him.   

**Q:**  I don't know one thing. The foreigners who do research on Chinese history say that in the years 1955 and 1956, Deng Xiaoping was supporting whatever Chairman Mao said. However, regarding the implementation of the Democratic Reform in Tibet, Deng Xiaoping, Mao, and Li Weihan disagreed and Mao and Li Weihan's thoughts were kind of similar, kind of rightist, whereas Deng Xiaoping was thinking that the Democratic Reforms were good. So the foreigners say that this was impossible because at that time, Deng Xiaoping and Mao had the same opinions. But in Kham it seems kind of different. What do you think?   

**A:**  I don't think it was possible that Deng Xiaoping would do something different than Mao. Mao saw things from both sides, but doing revolution was the basic goal of the Chinese Communist Party. When it was done excessively, they would withdraw a little bit, but implementing the Democratic Reforms was a basic thing. I think there would not have been any contradiction between the work lines of Mao and Deng. At the time there was no big gap between the positions of Mao and Deng. So it was impossible to have a contradiction.   

**Q:**  While it seems like that, maybe not on all matters. I mean on the matter of the Democratic Reform they were kind of different.   

**A:**  I think even regarding the reforms, it is impossible to have that. Mainly, as far as I am concerned, when Li Jingquan and Li Weihan had an argument, Deng Xiaoping supported Li Jingquan more and didn't support Li Weihan.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was the most powerful one, was it Deng Xiaoping or Li Weihan?   

**A:**  Deng Xiaoping was the Party's General Secretary and at that time, Chairman Mao, Zhou Enlai, and Liu Shaoqi were the main leaders. At the 56th General Assembly, he became the General Party Secretary [Ch. zong shu ji]. Li Jingquan and Li Weihan were the same rank. Li Jingquan was also promoted in 1958 and became a Committee Member [Ch. wei yuan] of the Politburo [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད; Ch. ju]. Li Weihan, however, fell down from the Politburo and became an ordinary committee member of the Central Committee. Among the Central Committee Ministers, Li Weihan was the only one who was not a Politburo Committee member. Therefore, he didn't have power in politics, so it was not okay for him not to report this. I think it is impossible that Mao and Deng would confront each other. When Li Jingquan and Li Weihan confronted each other, Deng supported Li Jingquan because Deng was from Sichuan. Li Jingquan respected Deng very much. Li Weihan took away his wife. It was not the contradiction between Mao and Deng. As for the mistakes of the right and left, I am also reading histories and there is a book of Zhou Enlai in Chinese called the "Old Age of Zhou Enlai" [Ch. wan nyan zhou en lai]. Was it translated into English? You can read that. In that book he criticized [Tib. གཤེ་གཤེ] Jiangqing and those people. It was said that Premier Zhou made the mistake of a rightist. Later, in the Cultural Revolution, they criticized and held a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> against Zhou Enlai. Until the Cultural Revolution nothing happened to Li Jingquan and he was also a Politburo Committee member. Even now, I don't understand why they did that to the Dalai Lama. Actually, the Dalai Lama and Li Dazhang didn't have any disagreements. Li Dazhang just wore a trench coat. According to the Chinese custom he should not have done that.   

**Q:**  Did Mao Zedong really say, "Li Weihan and I are rightists?"   

**A:**  This was true.   

**Q:**  I didn't see this in any book.   

**A:**  I have written in my article that Sangye Yeshe told me that. This was about whether or not to implement the Democratic Reforms in the monasteries and whether to confiscate the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་གཤིས] A &quot;religious&quot; estate held by a monastery or lama.">chöshi</a> (estates) of the monasteries. Tian Bao said that we should postpone doing the Democratic Reforms in the monasteries and we should not confiscate the monastic estates. "If you confiscate the chöshi, it will harm the monastery's livelihood." Deng Xiaoping said that reforms should be implemented: "If you implement the reforms, you should do it for all. If you leave the chöshi, it will become like an enclave left within a big place [Ch. bei di]." At some points, Chairman Mao's talk was smooth or gentle [Tib. འཇམ་པོ]. When Deng said that we had to do the reforms, and when Li Weihan was asked his opinion, he said, "Tian Bao's opinion is correct." This was the matter. It was an overall policy in Kham and Tibet. Mao said, "So Li Weihan and I are rightists and Deng and Li Jingquan are leftists. But, it would be better if all of us listened to Tian Bao's opinion." Then they decided on that. There wasn't any overall argument.   

**Q:**  Was that the meeting in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This was after they arrived in Beijing, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was after the Work Team came back.   

**Q:**  When Liu Geping came to Kham with the Work Team, were you his interpreter?   

**A:**  No, I was not. When he came, I was in the Institute of Nationalities and I was not the interpreter. I heard that they didn't send an interpreter. Therefore, Sichuan said that they hadn't sent a good interpreter.   

**Q:**  When Liu Geping came to Ganzi, did he make decisions like giving back the guns taken in the democratic reforms?   

**A:**  At that time, the 14 article policy had been announced. I don't remember the 14 articles and I went to search for the document, but there aren't any copies of it. It was written in the policy that it [reforms] were not allowed to be done in the monastery. Later, nothing was said about this 14 article report, whether it was good or bad. Liu Geping and I got along well and at the time of the Democratic Reforms he didn't have much rank. In the past, he had been imprisoned by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> and they signed their names and came out. There were 61 people who came out and Liu Geping and another one didn't sign their names. Later, signing this was regarded as a serious crime against Liu Shaoqi. There were 61 people and Bo Yibo is still alive. Later, they also suppressed Liu Geping and after the Cultural Revolution, Liu Geping's position was not high. I stayed with him and cooked for him and knew about these things. Liu Geping was really an honest and sincere person and I think he was a real communist. He didn't get any benefits from this and he said that if there wasn't trouble in Kham, it would have been beneficial to having a stable situation in Tibet. He also respected the Dalai Lama very much. When he and the Dalai Lama talked [when the Dalai Lama went to inland China], I was the interpreter many times. Usually, I was not the interpreter, but at that time, both Phüntso Tashi and the Phünwang were young and didn't have wives in Tibet, so they were searching for girlfriends. Phüntso Tashi got his wife in Tianjin. They were going to dances and those things and saying that they wanted to find a wife quickly. Thuwang liked to dance. The Dalai Lama used to tell me, "Now, Thuwangla's legs might be itching, so just leave the interpreting now. Let him be free and you, Jambeyla, can do that." Liu Geping didn't trust me much then: he thought I was just a child. Then Thuwang would say, "He is young, but he can interpret very well and he is better than me." He said that because he wanted to find a wife. Later, he also got scolded a lot for this. This is how I became the interpreter. At that time, every evening after the dinner, there was a show or dance.   

**Q:**  This was when the Dalai Lama came up, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he came up to Ya'an. Liu Geping would not play poker or anything and he always talked about Marxism and Leninism.   

**Q:**  What did he talk about?   

**A:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama was saying that the reformss should be implemented and that we had fallen behind.   

**Q:**  I met the Dalai Lama last year and he talked about this a lot, saying that the reforms should have been implemented.   

**A:**  Then he would talk about the revolutionary history of the Chinese Communist Party and the history of the Chinese revolution in detail. From Chongqing to Chengdu, if there was not a big evening gathering, the Dalai Lama and Liu Geping had talks. Zhang Jingwu would play mahjong but Liu Geping was different from them. The Dalai Lama asked him many questions and regarded him highly.   

**Q:**  Did Liu Geping put the 14 articles into practice?   

**A:**  Yes, he put a little bit into practice and until 1956, the Work Teams did well. He came back in April 1957. At that time, he put them into action and got the approval from the Cenral Committee who said it was well done. Then it was said that Liu Geping had to make the report in a big hotel called Hongbing Lou [Ch. hong bing lou]. Li Weihan served him the best roasted duck. He was Muslim and didn't eat pork. Less than one month after that, the movement for opposing the rightists arose. Since then, the direction changed. Chairman Mao talked about the right and the left and in 1957 in our country, it was said that rightist mistake was the main mistake and [everyone] opposed the rightists. Liu Geping didn't get the chance to report to the Central Committee.   

**Q:**  In 1956, Liu Geping went to Beijing once, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and then he went up [to Kham] again. When he came down, it was in April of 1957 and he celebrated the New Year in Luding. The weather in Luding was hot and he was old. The Work Team went to Ganzi and they made the 14 point report in Ganzi, not in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>. In Dartsedo he took his clerks and those people to Luding, saying that the weather was hot. He spent the New Year there. This person was working very meticulously [Tib. རུ་ངར་པོ]. He went to Kham again and held meetings and he demoted the position of Fan Zhizhong. Now, not even a head of a department would work like him.   

**Q:**  Was this in 1957?   

**A:**  Yes, in 1956, he demoted the Party Secretary [Tib. ཤུ་ཇི] and appointed Tian Bao as the Party Secretary, and appointed Fan Zhizhong as the Vice Party Secretary. Later, Fan Zhizhong [tried to] overturn his demotion, saying that Liu Geping didn't have the power to demote him and it was a violation of discipline. This should have been done by the Sichuan Province and the Organization Department [ rtsa 'dzugs Ch. bu]. "A minister of the Ministry of the United Front cannot demote me," was the complaint of Fan Zhizhong just before he died. But at that time, Liu Geping was powerful. He would say, "the procedure doesn't matter. I will go up and report this to the Central Committee." Later, he didn't report to the Central Committee. So until the Cultural Revolution, Tian Bao was the Party Secretary and Fan Zhizhong was the vice. In 1957, he came back to Beijing and was the leader of the Ministry of the United Front. When they opposed the rightists, it was said that there were three people in the Central Committee [?leading that]: Chairman Mao, Deng Xiaoping, and Li Weihan. Struggle sessions were held against many rightists. Liu Geping himself told me that when he came back to Beijing he didn't get the chance to make the report on the Work Team in Kham.   

**Q:**  In September 1955, there was a meeting where Zhou Enlai gave a speech on behalf of Mao Zedong. In between that, did Liu Geping go to Beijing?   

**A:**  Yes, he came to Beijing and there was trouble in the meeting and that was the main thing. After that, he went back again and when he came back, he didn't get the chance to report.   

