# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Graz, Austria  
**Date of Interview:** June 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English and Tibetan and transcribed entirely into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 57  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He subsequently became a translator and cadre and later a researcher/author in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In this interview, he talks about attending the Guomindang (GMD)'s school as tax while he was young. He describes his experience as a soldier including what he ate, how he had to cultivate waste land and also his experiences at the end of 1955. He then discusses the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama’s first meeting and how it caused trouble between them. Additionally he discusses the start of the democratic reforms in Kham and Tibet and how the reforms were delayed in Tibet because it was thought that implementing it slowly would be best.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_04/H_0060_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When you were young, why did you have to go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a>'s school as tax?   

**A:**  During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> period, there was a big conflict between the Chinese and Tibetans. The Tibetans did not trust the Chinese and they were also afraid of the Chinese. There was a quota that a certain number of children had to be sent to school. In Batang, there was only one elementary school which was called the, "State Run Batang Elementary School or Gyelnyer Batang Loptra Chungchung [Tib. རྒྱལ་གཉེར་འབའ་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆུང་ཆུང]. In the whole of the Kham area there were only two or three such elementary schools. Batang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> each had one school. The Yi Minority area from where Wu Jinghua came also had one. Many Tibetans did not have education and they were hard-headed. They were saying that they will not learn to speak and write the Chinese language. There was also the monk tax and the regulation was not strict for children to go to school. During that time, my family was poor. My father was not in Batang and my mother has seven children and she had a hard time raising all of the children. My older brother and I did not want to be monks. This was not because I did not believe religion. There was a landlord who did not want to send his child to school. Instead of that, he gave money, clothes and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> to my family and asked my family to send a child to school to take his child's place. The GMD called it Shuetre "[Ch. xue chai]" which means school tax. The Shuetre was carried out for three years (1945-1947). My older brother also went to school. So I got such a good opportunity to study. When we first went to the school it was during the Resistance War Against Japan [Tib. རི་འགོག་དམག་འཁྲུག], then in 1949, this system was abolished. I remember they did that for three years, for 1945,46, and 47. I was 7 years old then and my older brother also went to this school.   

**Q:**  When you first went to Tibet, did you go with Zhang Guohua?   

**A:**  Yes, I went with Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan.   

**Q:**  You were not among the advanced troop, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I was among the main soldiers.   

**Q:**  What did you and the other people do between the time you arrived and when you first started cultivating waste land?   

**A:**  There was only one month before we started to cultivate waste land. It has been 10 years since Tan Guansan died. Regarding this history I wrote Tan Guansan's Biography with 10, 000 characters. On October 26th, we had a ceremony for cultivating wasteland. During that time, we did not have enough food to eat. Recently I knew that when we were on the way to Tibet, Mao sent a letter to Deng Xiaoping. It was said that the People's Liberation Army should cultivate wasteland and support themselves [Tib. ཞིང་ག་བཏབས་ནས་དམག་མི་གསོ; Ch. ken huang yang bing]. The letter was sent in September. At that time, we did not know that because we were soldiers. Cultivating fields is a small thing, but Tan Guansan was appointed as the main leader. In the middle of November, they had a big meeting at which Tan Guansan and Zhang Guohua called on the army and then we went to Nortölinga to cultivate waste land.   

**Q:**  Did it take about 25 days for opening the fields?   

**A:**  It took more than that. Now I came to know from the documents. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] and Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and they gave permission for this. Ngabö and Surkhang [Note: Surkhang actually was still in India] also discussed and agreed that the People's Liberation Army could use Nortölinga for cultivation. The People's Liberation Army spent one month to cultivate 2,300 mu. Zhang Guohua said that even though they would have some difficulties, it was better to cultivate now rather than wait till next year because if they waited till next year, it would be bad for spring sowing. Moreover, it would be much easier to turn up the soil right now because the land was not totally frozen yet.   

**Q:**  What kind of food were you eating during that time?   

**A:**  I could remember that we did not have any rice. However, I interviewed an old chief of staff [Ch. can mou zhang] who is over 80 years old and lives in Beijing. He says that when the People's Liberation Army arrived in Lhasa, they had food for only three days. Ngabö secretly sold them some grain. Tsarong and other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> sold them some grain too. Phüntso Wangye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] took responsibility for getting the grain. At the same time, the Grain Management Office, the drurig <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདག་གཉེར] A manager, usually in a commune/brigade.">dagnyer</a> lekhung. [Tib. འབྲུ་རིགས་བདག་གཉེར་ལས་ཁུངས] was established. The Tibetan Government sent Surkang [NoteL who returned to Lhasa in 1952] to this office and the Chinese send Lijue and Phünwang. After that, we bought some barley and peas. But there were no water mills surrounding Lhasa area except at Medro Gongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར]. Moreover, We also did not have enough fuel to roast the barley and beans so we had to have boiled barley and beans. We had boiled barley and peas for half a year. But we were not eating boiled barley and peas every day. Sometimes they transported some rice from China and sometimes they bought rice from India. Sometimes we used animal's horns as fuel and later used it for fertilizer. So we did have some ground barley and beans.   

**Q:**  For how many months did you eat barley and beans?   

**A:**  Almost half of a year we have been eating that. At that time, I ate Indian peanuts for the first time. Sometimes, we could grind (the grains) to make tsampa. In February, when the disturbance took place, we came back from to the Cadre's School. I worked on the fields only for two months. I wrote an article saying that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> helped Tibet according to Mao's instructions to lessen the burden on the people, but now some of the Tibetan youth in Tibet and Beijing are arguing that this was not the case. This was a policy of the Chinese to conquer the minorities like Xinjiang, Mongolia by first sending soldiers and opening fields and then the soldiers brought their wives and stayed there. What you wrote is wrong because they didn't consider the [interests of the] Tibetan people then. You just thought about the temporary benefit and didn't see the long run future.   

**Q:**  Regarding the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama's first meeting, there was some trouble. I asked the Dalai Lama twice about that.   

**A:**  What did he say?   

**Q:**  When I watched the VCR, it was just like what you said. The Dalai Lama was not sitting on the throne, but was standing on the stage. And the Dalai Lama was bending down like this and the Panchen Lama was offering him the Mandala. But the Dalai Lama told me, "it was decided for me to stand near the throne. So I stood near the throne." At that time, why did the Panchen Lama's attendants get angry?   

**A:**  What they said was that they needed the two of them to have equal height thrones. At that time, according to my opinion, the problem was that Fan Ming and Che Jigme had a lot of arguments. They were saying the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama should be seated faced to face [Tib. ཁ་སྤྲོད] and that they are equal. If the Dalai Lama would sit on the throne and the Panchen Lama met him, it will be too high for him. Later, Che Jigme, Ngabö and Zhang Guohua discussed this and one of the interpreter then was Phüntso Wangye, but he was always arguing that he was not the interpreter and he was one of the leaders and was the representative of the Tibet Work Committee. The interpreter was the Chinese Fu Shizhong who was brought by Zhang Jingwu, and he [Phüntso Wangye] helped him on some Lhasa dialects and political terms because Fu Shizhong spoke the Kham dialect. At that time, Phüntre [Tib. ཕུན་བཀྲས] was also there. He had come through India. When I asked Phüntre, he said that he was not there. It seems to me that the idea of the Northwest was to elevate the position of the Panchen Lama a little bit and put down the position of the Dalai Lama a little bit. When I looked at the documents, they [Northwest] might have been thinking that Ü or Front Tibet [Tib. དབུས Ch. qian zang] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> or Back Tibet [Tib. གཙང Ch. hou zang] were half and half with the Dalai Lama holding Ü and the Pachen Lama holding Tsang. So they were saying that the thrones should be equal and both should offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf to the other. I heard that they accepted it and Ngabö said that this will be okay and I will report this to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> and the Drönyerchemmo. I asked Fan Ming and he said that the people of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> even took out guns [they were so angry]. I am not sure that was true or not.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, it was decided that the Dalai Lama will get down from the throne, right? Regarding Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama's first meeting, why was Panchen Lama so mad about this meeting?   

**A:**  It was decided the Dalai Lama will come near the door and then the Panchen Lama will offer the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf and then be seated on an equal throne facing each other.   

**Q:**  Do you mean when the Panchen Lama entered the room, the Dalai Lama will get down from the stage, right? Where will he stay when the Panchen Lama comes in?   

**A:**  What Fan Ming said was that the Dalai Lama will come out from the palace [room] and offer the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a>. Later, I asked Ngabö and he said there was no such thing agreed and it was also impossible. I heard actually that when the Panchen Lama entered the room, the Dalai Lama was standing on the stage and Panchen Lama offered the khata because he was just a child. Then the Panchen Lama sat on a throne which was placed near the Dalai Lama's throne. At that time, Fan Ming also fought with Zhang Guohua. Fan Ming told Zhang Guohua that you are standing on the Dalai Lama's side and are surrendering to Ngabö. Zhang Guohua said that Ngabö asked the Drönyerchemmo. This might be Phala. Ngabö said, "On one hand, they didn't report me and on the other hand, there was no such custom. When the Fifth Dalai Lama met Gushri khan, the Dalai Lama's throne was placed in the middle and it was higher. The Panchen Chökyi Nyima's [Tib. ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མ] throne was placed on one side even though he was the tutor of the Dalai Lama and the one who recognized him and cut the tuft of hair when he became a monk. And on the other side, Gushri khan's throne was placed. It is impossible to have to place the throne separately. ... The local government didn't cause trouble and wasn't looking down on the Panchen Lama" Ngabö gave this answer. Even now Fan Ming is saying that Ngabö is two-faced and Zhang Guohua is also two faced.   

**Q:**  He [Fan Ming] is tough.   

**A:**  You might have met him?   

**Q:**  Yes. I didn't ask him about this.   

**Q:**  So Fan Ming scolded Zhang Guohua, right?   

**A:**  This was not only the throne matter, but from this point the internal contradiction started. Now I have come to know that they had an argument [Tib. རྟོད་པ] about who will be the Party Secretary [Tib. ཤུ་ཇི]. The main point was the Tibet Work Committee.   

**Q:**  Fan Ming wanted to be the leader, right?   

**A:**  The Party Secretary was Zhang Guohua and the Vice Party Secretary was Tan Guansan and Fan Min was just an uyön. Fan Ming was arguing with him [Zhang Guohua] saying, "You should be the one in charge of the military and I will be [the one in charge] of the Work Committee. This was the starting point.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  This was in 1952 when the Panchen Lama was about to come. Usually, there were two Vice Party Secretaries, for example, in the Southwest, they have two Vice Party Secretaries; the Party Secretary was Deng Xiaoping and Liu Bochen and He Long were the Vice Party Secretaries. On the military, the first commander [Ch. si ling yuan] was Liu Bochen and the second commander was He Long. Deng Xiaoping was the Political Commissar [Tib. chab srid uyön]. It was not a matter of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama, rather from that time the contradiction between those two [Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming] became conspicuous. In the past, it was a matter for inside the party, but later it was seen outside that they had this contradiction. Then Ngabö and Surkhang knew that they had this contradiction. From that small ceremony, many matters became conspicuous. Actually, it doesn't matter whether they offered a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> or not.   

**Q:**  When did Hu Jingtao came to Tibet the first time?   

**A:**  Probably, it was in December of 1988. On the 9th of January, the Panchen Lama came to Lhasa. I met him on the 7th, and the 8th was the day commemorating the death of the Zhou Enlai. At that time, Hu Jingtao had already arrived in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Tell me in detail how the democratic reforms started in Kham and in Tibet? At that time, were you in Chengdu?   

**A:**  I was in Chengdu.   

**Q:**  How did it start? Some people say that in 1955, there was a meeting of the poor people and after that they held the meeting of the chiefs or Pön [Tib. དཔོན]. Is that true?   

**A:**  This is true. It was not really poor people, but in June-August of 1955 I went to the first National people's Congress in Beijing. At that time I was a student and they called me to be the interpreter saying that they were short of interpreters. They were talking about the nationwide cooperative transformation of agriculture [Tib. ཞིང་ལས་མཉམ་ལས་ཅན་དུ་སྒུར་བ]. In Russia they called it common farm [Tib. ཐུན་མོང་ཞིང་ར]. There was a work by Mao titled, "Regarding the Cooperative Transformation of Agriculture." They didn't distribute that at the National People's Congress, but at the Party's meeting. When we came back from Beijing after the meeting, this document was distributed. I remember that clearly because we had to translate the documents. At that time, it was said that there are many foot-bound women [Tib. སྐྱེ་དམན་རྐང་རིལ་མ, Ch. xiao jiao nu ren] in the party. This implied that those people couldn't make big steps. They were refuting this and they were saying that we should set up the collectives to speed up going to the socialism. At the time of the liberation, there were many shops and factories which was owned by the capitalists. In Russia they killed all of those people, but we did the "joint state-private ownership" [Tib. གཞུང་སྒེར་མཉམ་གཉེར] and did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླུ་ཉོའི་སྲིད་ཇུས] The Chinese government&#x27;s policy of compensating the bourgeoisie/lords for the loss of their property and possessions.">redeeming policy</a> [Tib. བླུ་ཉོའི་སྲིད་ཇུས]. They sent the representative of the party into the shop. For example, the government paid the cost of the house and the owner paid the interest for 7 years. At that time, all over the world the trend of going to socialism was becoming stronger. At that time, I didn't know it, but later I heard that Li Jingquan, the Party Secretary of Sichuan Province and the Political Commissar of the military was capable and was holding the power. He was a bad man, he made the decision to implement the democratic reform in Sichuan and Liangshan after reporting to the Central Comomittee and it was approved. At that time, they held the National People's Congress in Beijing in June-July. According to the Chinese system, the students graduated in July 16th, but at that time, I was not graduated when I went to Beijing. When they held the meetings in the province, Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་སྟོབས་ལྡན] and Harkong Trinley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, Jayang Palmo [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཔལ་མོ]. [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Pomda Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས]?   

**A:**  He belonged to Chamdo, in Tibet. At that time, they were told that we have to do the democratic reforms and they made them to raise their hands and all of them were kept in Chengdu. So it was not unreasonable for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> to say that the Dalai Lama will be kept in 1959. Namely, they were saying that they were holding the People's Congress and gave them good food and didn't let them go home. So they send some of their servants. For example, Jagö Tomden and Jayang Palmo did the same where the father became the progressive and the representative of the people and vice chairman of the autonomous region and the son joined the revolt and the went to the hills. The Khambas liked their guns and to tell you the truth, this [rebellion] was not made for launching the revolt. The province told them to collect the guns.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the Zhongyang is the Party Committee?   

**A:**  This is the Party's Zhongyang committee [Tib. tang gi krung dbyang uyön lhan khang].   

**Q:**  So this was not the government, right?   

**A:**  As far as we are concerned, Zhongyang [Central Committee] and the government is the same. Outwardly it is two, but internally it is one even nowadays. The government and the party are inseparable. In the past, the chairman of the both the government and the party was Mao. I remember that then they sent the Military (armed) Work Teams [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་ལས་དོན་རུ་ཁག] in Kham carrying guns. When they did the democratic reform in China, they also sent the Military Work Team because there were bandits and thieves and private guards of the landlords even after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> was eliminated. They sent the Work Team to collect the guns and some of them went to the monasteries [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  This was in 1955, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was in November-December.   

**Q:**  The meeting was held in September?   

**A:**  It was in September-October. It was soon after that almost at the same time. I also had some trouble. I was supposed to be going back to Tibet, but they said that we have to get prepared for the democratic reforms, so my older brother and some of us were left there to be teachers. They set up two classes in the Southwest Institute of Nationalities, [Tib. ལྷོ་ནུབ་མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]. One was called teacher's school [Tib. དགེ་རྒན་སློབ་གྲྭ] and other was called math school [Tib. ཨང་རྩིས་སློབ་གྲྭ]. After the democratic reforms were done, they had to set up the cooperatives and they said that there is no one doing the accountancy, so they just set up the school in an urgent manner and the students didn't need to graduate in 4 years. All of the students were Chinese and I was left there to teach them Tibetan writing. There were 7-8 of us. They [Work Team] were sent up in October, then they started fighting. When they went to the monasteries, they not only robbed the guns, but also went to the chapels of the protective deities and took away the swords, spears and the Tibetan [matchlock] guns kept there. When I heard about the democratic reforms, to tell you the truth, I was very glad. When I was told to stay in Chengdu to be a teacher, I was just a member of the Communist Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་སྡེ་ཚོགས], I said, "I will listen to the party, but it has been a long time since I haven't meet my parents, so would it be okay if I go to my homeland?" They said it is okay and I was sent with the Military Work Team. When we arrived in Litang, the disturbance took place. Then I went to Ba for the New Year. It was said the revolt was done with a plan. At that time, I was just a child, but now when I think about it, they didn't have any plan. After that, the sons of Jagö Tomden and Jayang Palmo went back and they took guns and hid them in the caves and hid the gold and silver in the mountaind. At that time, there were only two regiments [Ch. tuan; Tib. མདའ་ཁག]; one in the south like Ganzi and one in Kham. The regiment in Litang and Ba was the 4th regiment. At that time, I didn't take off my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> uniform and they gave me food with the Military Work Team. I was the interpreter and they also liked me and treated me well. Then they started fighting when they went to take their guns and then they went to the mountain and then they were called rebel bandits [Ch. pan fei; Tib. ངོ་ལོག་ཇག་པ]. This means they were the political bandits.When they went to the mountains, they [PLA] went to chase them and since both parties had guns, so they fought.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in one regiment?   

**A:**  There were little over 3,000 soldiers and there were 9 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་ཤོག] A unit in the traditional Tibetan Army consisting of 100 soldiers.">gyashog</a> [Tib. ལིཨན]. Among the gyashog, there was the engineer gyashog [Ch. gong bing lian] for doing construction.   

**Q:**  Did they come from Chengdu?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, I was also a soldier.   

**Q:**  On one hand, going on the path of socialism is good, but on the other hand according to Mao's order, it was said that in Tibet it is only allowed to do it slowly. So what was the Party Secretary of the Province thinking? On one hand Zhongyang was talking about going on the socialism path, but I heard that in the minority areas, Mao said it should be done slowly.   

**A:**  There were two principles said by Chairman Mao. On the one hand, we should hold peace talks, and on the other hand we should make friendly relations [Tib. མཐུན་སྒྲིལ] from the top to the bottom. In China and Russia it was done from the bottom to the top. In Tibet, for example, for the people like Ngabö, they gave titles and guaranteed that their living condition will not become worse. Chairman Mao was a revolutionary and not a religious person, so I think at that time his thinking was correct. Chairman Mao said that we should reform the old system which is not good and there will be development. I think even now when we look back it was correct.   

**Q:**  Do you mean it was right that they did the reforms?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They didn't misunderstand the report, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The reforms should be done, but as for the way for doing the reform, one is to do it in a gentle manner [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] and other is to do it in an violent [Tib. ཛ་དྲག] and fast manner. Li Jingquan didn't want to be like the foot-bound woman. At that time, in all of the party, they were criticizing the foot-bound women so he wanted to do it very fast. For example, in Zhongyang there was the person called Liu Geping, the Vice Director [Ch. bu zhang; Tib. གཞོན་པ] of the United Front Bureau, who gave his opinion that it is being done too fast. But Li Jingquan didn't listen to him saying that the consciousness of the masses is high and the Tibetan people are very good, so they will accept it and there were just a few kudrak. In Chengdu when they asked me, I said that the reforms should be done. When they gave the exams to the students, they asked about the society and we said that the reforms should be done and the system is bad and the Tibetan areas are falling behind, so the reform should be done fast. I was praised saying that the content of my exam is good and my Chinese is good.   

**Q:**  Then the disturbance took place and later how did they settle it?   

**A:**  It seemed to me that the trouble occurred later from both sides. In the beginning, under the communist education, I was thinking that the old society is bad. The reform should be done, otherwise, the rich will remain rich and the poor will remain poor. At that time, they didn't discuss and didn't do the reform peacefully. So the trouble occurred in the beginning of the 1956. Didn't I tell you that I spent the New Year in Ba at that time? Since the liberation I had never spent the New Year at home. Then Zhongyang said that the situation is not okay and it is definite that they [Khambas] will lose war because they couldn't cope with them [PLA]. Then in the beginning of 1956, they [the Khambas] crossed the Yangtse River and went to Chamdo area and there was lot of disturbance in Chamdo which will make the people in Tibet feel startled [Tib. འདྲོག་མགོ]. At that time, mainly it was the Dalai Lama because the Panchen Lama was young. The two of them probably told their opinion to Zhongyang saying that we shouldn't do that because many Khambas are coming to us. Then Zhongyang sent Liu Geping, a Muslim who died the year before last year when he was in his 80s, as the Team Leader [Tib. ཟུ་ཞང] of the Work Team and he came up to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> and said that it was done excessively. He and Wu Lanfu were the only people among the minorities who were so powerful. He told Li Jingquan, "What you did was wrong and it is against what Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou said. He made a 14 point document on what points we should be attentive to when we do democratic reforms in Kham and the Liangshan area, by which he meant the Tibetan areas in Sichuan. At that time, I could remember the 14 points but now I couldn't get this document and he himself didn't have that. This document was meant to criticize Deng Xiaoping and those people, and it was related to their benefit [Tib. ཁེ་ཕན]. At that time, Chairman Mao was saying something to both sides. These 14 points were approved by Chairman Mao and Deng Xiaoping was backing Li Jingquan. They were in the Southwest.   

**Q:**  Deng Xiaoping wanted to do the reforms fast, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was among the aggressive [Tib. ངར་པོ] ones. Liu Geping said that this is wrong and he wrote the 14 points and submitted them to Chairman Mao and they were approved by Mao who said that what Liu Geping said is correct, so we have to do it according to what Liu Geping said. In principle, all of them were revolutionaries and wanted to do the reforms, but it was the matter of way of doing it fast or not.   

**Q:**  Did Mao Zedong know that Deng Xiaoping was backing Li Jingquan?   

**A:**  Yes he knew. Chairman Mao wanted to do the revolution and in general, doing the reforms fast was regarded as better. But when the trouble occured, Chairman Mao said that you didn't do what I said to do. Anyway, Mao became correct and there was no big contradiction. But, the contradiction between Liu Geping and Li Jingquan became very serious. After the 14 point was made, the situation in Kham calmed a little bit. There were two reasons for that; the democratic reforms became much more calm [Tib. ལྷོད] and Chen Yi went to Lhasa to set up the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> and Zhongyang gave a strict order, "it is important to set up the PCTAR, so do not cause trouble in Kham and a single <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> is not allowed to go out from Kham. In case, some go out, you should bear the responsibly." So then the situation became calm. At that time, Khrushchev held the 20th session of General Assembly of the Communist Party of Soviet Union and Khrushchev made a secret report to criticize Stalin which made Chairman Mao's very disturbed [Tib. འཁྲུག་ཆ] because the Chinese regarded criticizing someone after their death a very bad thing. Mao thought that if they criticized Stalin after his death, I will be criticized after my death. At first, the PCTAR was set up with a grand ceremony where Chen Yi, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama attended the meeting. At the end of that year [1966], the Dalai Lama went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[hind. Buddha Jayanti] The 1956 celebration in India of the 2,500 anniversary of the death (nirvana) of the Buddha.">Buddha Jayanti</a> [in India]. There were a lot of arguments about whether they should let him go or not. Some were saying that if we let him go, he will not return. Later, Chairman Mao himself approved and said let him go. At that time, there was a person called Liuping, the Vice Director [Ch. zhu ren; Tib. གཞོན་པ] of the National Affairs Committee [Tib. mi rigs don gcod uyön lhan khang]. He was the one who took the phone and reported to Chairman Mao. At that time, Zhang Jingwu made a phone call to Deng Xiaoping and they reported to Mao. When the Dalai Lama went to India, there was talk that Gyalo Thöndrub [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] and Alo Chöndze and those people didn't want to let him go back. And what you call that Tibetan association?   

**Q:**  It was called outwardly Tibet Welfare Association or Dedön Tshogpa [Tib. བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ] and internally it was called Jenkhentsisum. They were the main ones and then there were also the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> who went outside [to India].   

**A:**  Then Premier Zhou and He Long went to Delhi and met the Dalai Lama and told him to come back. I heard that the interpreter was Li Zuomin. Premier Zhou told the Dalai Lama a Tibetan proverb, "if the lion remained in the mountain, it is a lion. If the lion stays in the plains, it is like an old dog." [Tib. སེང་གེ་རི་ལ་བསྡད་ན་སེང་གེ་ཡིན། སེང་གེ་ཐང་ལ་བསྡད་ན་ཁྱི་རྒན་འདྲ]. Also, he said, "If you stay in Tibet, you are a deity [Tib. ལྷ] but if you stay in India you are a hungry ghost [Tib. ཡི་དྭགས].   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama told me this.   

**A:**  Then this must be true.   

**Q:**  Yes it is true.   

**A:**  At that time, if you tell him to come back, he will not come easily and you have to tell him the reason. Chairman Mao had said that there should be two methods: a peaceful one and a violent one. As for the violent one, we should say, "You better come back. The PRC has many people and if you come back, it is nothing other than having one additional household. It is like Wang Ming didn't come back from the Soviet Union. So in the north, there was Wang Ming and in the south there will be the Dalai Lama." In the past, Wang Ming was a leader in the Communist Party who went to the Soviet Union for medication and didn't come back. As for the peaceful method, we will say "we will not do the reforms for 6 years from 1956. And even after 6 years, you and the high ranking people of Tibet can discuss whether we should do the reform or not [then]." Later, they were saying that we had a stick and a sweet [carrot] strategy. The stick was saying it is nothing even if you don't come back, and the sweet [the carrot] said that will be a 6 years postponement of the reforms. The reason why they said that they will not do the reforms for 6 years was because, on the one hand, it was the international situation, and on the other hand, there was really trouble in Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> because it [reforms had been] done excessively. I met Liu Geping many times when I was his interpreter. He was a sincere and honest man and he criticized that it was done excessively.   

**Q:**  In Tibet in 1956, they prepared for the reforms and called many people from mainland China. How did that happen?   

**A:**  This trouble was caused by the party itself because everything was under the united leadership of the party. At that time, it was said that we should oppose the foot-bound women and make the socialism transformation occur faster. So they prepared for the democratic reforms in Tibet thrpugh the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> and Fan Ming also made it stronger and he was saying that Zhang Jingwu is a rightist and he is too slow. Zhang Guohua was saying, "you are not too fast, but you just caused the trouble. I am doing it fast." Actually Fan Ming and both of them wanted to do it fast. After the meeting of the TAR was held, Zhang Guohua became the first vice director and the Panchen Lama was also vice director and the Dalai Lama was the director of the TAR. Ngabö was the General Secretary. At that time, they were doing the reforms in China and Kham and the Panchen Lama also said that the reforms should be done. And Je Jigme and those people were saying that we should do experimental (trial) reforms. I also heard that the Dalai Lama also said we should do the reforms. So Chen Yi told the Dalai Lama, "you shouldn't do this. If you do it excessively, the people around you cannot catch up and you will be left isolated." I saw this in the documents. I don't know what actually happened. So it was said they [the Cenral Committee] had been very concerned about the Dalai Lama because he was a child. I heard that when he went to China, he said that we should reform the old system. Fan Ming was saying that Zhang Jingwu and the Zhang Guohua are too slow and they are the foot-bound women in the Tibet Work Committee. Zhang Guohua told Fan Ming, "You are not a real revolutionary. You are a trouble maker." There was no argument on doing the reforms. In 1956, the British and Egypt made war on taking over the Suez River and there were disturbances in Hungary amd in Poland and the Russians sent soldiers.   

**Q:**  At that time, when Fan Ming and those people submitted the report, did the Chairman Mao and Deng Xiaoping approve it?   

**A:**  Probably not, because they were in the procession of discussing it. In 1956, the disturbance in Kham took place. The CCP was very powerful and whatever they did, they did it fast and aggressively and the order was to use force [Tib. བཙན་དབང]. In Kham it was started in December [1955] and then there was the New Year and then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> was set up in April [1956].   

**Q:**  In Tibet, they also called recruited cadres. Was this approved by the higher authorities [question not finished].   

**A:**  In 1956, Fan Ming recruited many people from inland China to Tibet for doing the reforms. At that time, the Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua had gone to Beijing to attend meetings. So Fan Ming was saying that he is going to recruit many people and do the reforms and he is going to correct Zhang Jingwu's mistake [of being like a foot-bound woman].   

**Q:**  Did Fan Ming have the power to do so without asking Beijing?   

**A:**  He might have reported to the higher ups. Probably, he didn't make all the decisions. Otherwise, how could he recruit the people, the vehicles and the expenses. And he also promoted the cadres. I came in 1956. At that time, all the cadres were raised 3 levels in Tibet. I was among the old revolutionaries, but I was in Chengdu studying when they raised the levels, so I suffered a loss. [laughs] At that time, we got little more than 40 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> and they get over 100 dayang. When the reform was delayed, Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua told Fan Ming, "You recruited many people and spend lot of expenditures and caused trouble. You are not a revolutionary." Like this, in the next year [1958], Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua labled Fan Ming a rightist when they opposed the rightists in Tibet.   

**Q:**  So he became the big rightist of Tibet, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And in 1958, they held struggle sessions and send him back and then he was finished. I was in the Literature Office, [Tib. རྩོམ་རིག་ལས་ཁུངས] of the Minorities and he was the leader of the anthropology [Tib. མི་རིགས་རིག་པ] section. He was the General Secretary of Fan Ming who had came from the northwest. He said that the main thing was the matter of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama and it was not done by Fan Ming, but was done by Li Weihan and Fan Ming of United Front Bureau in Beijing. The approval was given by Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou. At that time, Deng Xiaoping was in the northwest in Chongqing. This was in 1950 and 1951. The CCP did a lot of research on this, but since they haven't been to Tibet, at that time, it was said that the 18th Army Corps should take the responsible of Ü [Tib. དབུས] which they call it front Tibet [Tib. མདུན་བོད; Ch. qian zang]. And the northwest should take the responsible of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང] which they called back Tibet [Ch. hou zang; Tib. རྒྱབ་བོད]. If necessary, you can set up two Military Area Commands [Ch. jun qu]. So it was that Fan Ming caused the trouble, but he didn't do it without any reason.   

**Q:**  How did this happen?   

**A:**  This is written in documents.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  This was a proposal in the research document of 1950, but not in the approved Zhongyang document. I also asked Li Jue who was among those people making the document. He was a chief of staff [Ch. can mou zhang] of the 18th Army Corps and now he is in Beijing. When they did the research, they didn't know the situation of Tibet and they were reading the documents of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> and the Manchu Government. Ya Hanzhang had become a monk in Drepung for 8 years. In 1938 at the time of the Resistance War Against the Japanese, he was a youth and not a university graduate student. He had passed the middle school in Yan An. At that time, they had a nationality team, [Tib. མི་རིགས་ཚོགས་ཆུང] and they set up the School for the Nationalities in Yan An. Ya Hanzhang went to Yan An to join the Resistance War Against the Japanese, but he had never seen a Japanese. Since he was from Gansu, they said that they needed a Tibetan intellectual and he was sent to Drepung to be a monk in 1938. He was sincere and capable, but he didn't get any promotion. But later just before he died, he was promoted to a vice director [Ch. bu zhang; Tib. གཞོན་པ]. So he got the privileges for health care, but had only three rooms. I have 4 rooms now. He could read Tibetan, but couldn't speak like you, and he also had a very hard Gansu accent when he spoke Chinese. Ya Hanzhang was not among the ones who made the document and at that time his rank was low. The document was made in Beijing and one in charge was Li Weihan and those people. In the document, it was said that if necessary, we will take out Chamdo. They had made an proposal [Tib. གྲོས་གཞི] in which it was written that they will set up the Military Area Command in Lhasa of which the person in charge will be the Southwest [troops] and they will set up the Military Area Command. In Shigaste, the northwesr will be in charge. They had distributed this proposal to the leaders. I think the way Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan did was not good because this will only cause trouble and they caused trouble to the Tibetan government (Tib. དེཝཤུང). Since there were two Military Area Commands, maybe they might have been thinking that when we went up and they will come down from Shigatse. So there will be an endless fighting internally. Therefore, Zhang Guohua opposed this. At that time in 1951, Zhang Guohua was 36 years old and was smart. He was born in the Hare Year. He said that there will be problems from both inside and outside.   

**Q:**  Was this before the Chamdo war or after?   

**A:**  The proposal might have been made before the Chamdo War or at the same time when Tibet was peacefully liberated. I am not sure because the document didn't say the month. Fan Ming was saying that this proposal is good and he was insisting that this proposal should be put into action because this is a Zhongyang document. If this was not like that, he wouldn't dare to make the decision. He didn't have the guts and the methods to do that. So it was not convenient for Zhang Guohua to oppose him because the document was not made by 1-2 people. Fan Ming had also said that this will be beneficial for splitting Tibet and not having it become united [Tib. རུབ་རུབ]. He said that we should "divide and rule" [Tib. ཁ་འཕྲལ་ནས་དབང་སྒྱུར་བྱེད་དགོས]. So the higher ups also couldn't say that this is wrong and we can't say that the higher ups have not agreed to this. Fan Ming had read a lot of Chinese histories, so he was insisting on doing that. Long after that, in 1956, when Chen Yi went to Tibet, he said do not do that. Before that, even the Central Committee had not made the decision to do that or not, and hadn't said that the way of doing this is not okay. Then Ya Hanzhang also submitted his opinion because he was knowledgeable and knew the situation of Tibet and was the General Secretary of Tibet Work Committee. He said that the so called front Tibet and back Tibet is not like what we said. He told this to Premier Zhou and Li Weihan. He told them that the Panchen Lama didn't have power and government [ove a back Tibet] and they had only control over 3 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and about 40 some estates. He said there is only the local government [Dalai Lama's governmnet] and it is not just the front Tibet government. Even the dzongpön of Shigatse [in Tsang] was appointed by the Kashag. This talk was very effective [Tib. གནག་པོ]. It was something that Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan could not say on the meeting, so therefore, Fan Ming called Ya Hanzhang, Ya Hanjian which means "traitor Ya" [Tib. ནང་རུལ་པ] [for his saying that].   

**Q:**  So even though Ya Hanzhang was from the northwest, he stood on Zhang Guohua's side, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is Jayang Palmo from Sichuan still there?   

**A:**  She died. She was the wife of the Derge King,and the the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> of Jagö Tomden.   

**Q:**  At one time, there was a resolution on the meeting in Sichuan.   

**A:**  This was the resolution saying that we should do the democratic reforms.   

**Q:**  Is this resolution available?   

**A:**  Yes. This was published in the newspaper in 1955.   

**Q:**  Please try to get one copy of this for me as it will be helpful.   

**A:**  Okay. It was said that Jagö Tomden was two-faced because in the daytime he raised his hands [in agreement] but at night he sent his son to the mountains [to fight].   

**Q:**  My last question is that in the 1950s, both sides suffered losses. The Dalai Lama suffered the loss and the PRC also suffered a loss because the revolt took place and the Dalai Lama went out, and this is the base of the current trouble, right? So what is the cause or base [Tib. གཞི་རྩ] for them not being able to work out something? What were the mistakes of the Tibetans and what were the mistakes of the Central Committee?   

**A:**  According to my opinion, there were several points. As far as the Central Committee is concerned, from after the liberation until 1956, the Central Committee had been very careful. But in 1956, the world situation underwent a great change when Khrushchev opposed Stalin and the CCP regarded this as very bad. It was saying that this is root or cause of the Soviet Union getting wrecked [Tib. སྦོ་ལུག]. Even now they are accepting that after Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Gorbachev and Yeltsin all became worse one after another. According to my opinion, since the Soviet Union went towards the right, Mao turned it backwards [Tib. ཚུར] or to the left and although he had opposed Li Jingquan and approved the 14 points put forward by Liu Geping, he sent Liu Geping to Nyingxia and the Nyingxia Muslims Autonomous Region was set up in 1958. He became the head of the Autonomous Region for just one year before he was put down in 1959 and labelled as a local nationalist [Tib. ས་གནས་མི་རིགས་རིང་ལུགས]. In 1956, when Liu Geping went to Kham and put forward his opinions, at that time, he didn't dare to criticize Deng Xiaoping because he was the Central Committee's General Party Secretary [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ Ch. shu ji] and was powerful, so he criticized Li Jingquan. Liu Geping joined the party in 1924 and it was the same time that Deng Xiaoping joined the party. At that time, he didn't report many things to Deng Xiaoping and he would go directly to find Mao and the Premier Zhou. In 1959, when Peng Dehuai was put down in Beijing, Liu Geping was also put down. Since Mao was a revolutionary and not a religious person, it is definite that he would make revolution, and I also thought that this should be done. I was from a poor family and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>s both inside and outside were bad. But they did stop me not, and I wrote in the biography of the Panchen Lama. It was a big mistake doing the revolution [reforms] excessively. They were saying that 95% of the agricultural serfs [Tib. ཞིང་བྲན] were good and the 5% of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མངའ་བདག; ch. 领主] Feudal lord, manorial estate holders, serf-owners.">ngadag</a> (landlords) and ngartsab (agents of the lords) were bad and they were doing the democratic reform to the 5%, but in reality this 5% was not much affected or damaged [Tib. སྐྱོན་ཕོག]. Some [of these 5%] went with the Dalai Lama and some like Ngabö, were regarded as in the united front. So actually the poor were fighting the poor. This is the main grudge [Tib. ན་ཚ] of the masses which even now the higher ups don't understand. They do not believe when the people say that in the democratic reforms, the poor suffered. For example, the girl called Pihua was respecting us very much and was calling us teacher. They were talking about Pasang and Ragti. [the meaning of this section is unclear] When they went to collect the guns [in Sichuan], Jagö Tomden and Jayang Palmo would not carry guns but their servants would carry the guns. So when they ran away, they [PLA] fired at them and then they shot back and the situation became worse. There is one thing true in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s book. I think there is one point that Li Jingquan was unreasonable so that led to many people going [fleeing] to Tibet from Kham. First they went to Chamdo and later they went to Lhoka, and in 1959 they went to Lhasa. I think this was our mistake. It was the mistake of the Central Committee and of Sichuan Province. Now, we are [still] not realizing our mistake and are saying the revolt was launched by the Dalai Lama and the spies of the reactionary Americans, especially when Surkhang and Trijang went up [returned from Beijing]. But this is impossible. If this was the case, then the Dalai Lama was too smart and had deceived Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou. Actually, he did not deceive them. They [the Chinese] told the Tibetan government to eliminate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and Chushigandru offered the golden throne to the Dalai Lama and said please support us. In Shakabpa's book, it is written that the local government was like a drum beaten from the inside and outside [Tib. རྔ་ཕྱི་རྡུང་དང་ནང་རྡུང]. The Chinese were saying that they supported the revolt and Chushigandru said that they came into exile [in Lhasa] leaving one's homeland, but you are not supporting us. I think this is reasonable. At that time, it was very hard for the Dalai Lama and the local government to handle this, and as an official of the government it will be hard to suppress the Khambas. Therefore, they called Surkhang and those people two-faced. In the past, when I was the interpreter for the Dalai Lama on livelihood matters and Thuwang was the main interpreter, we two were friendly and he would tell me many things and even now he is my neighbor. I was very much moved when the Dalai Lama would see off Liu Geping to the door and his character was very gentle. Surkhang was looking down on me and once he asked my name and where am I from. I said I am from Ba, and he said you are not from Ba because you don't have the name Kelsang. Then I said if so, why is Phüntso Wangye not called Kelsang Phüntso. Then the Dalai Lama told Surkhang, "Now what do you have to say. It is definite that the kudrak didn't want to do the reforms. In terms of class, they opposed the revolution and in terms of Chinese and Tibetans, they opposed the Chinese. If we poor people say that Tibet is independent, we only oppose one thing but the kudraks opposed two things.   

**Q:**  If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> like Ngabö and Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] had power, would it have made any difference?   

**A:**  I think it was hard because deep down they were also the same. I stayed with Ngabö Rinchen [Tib. རིན་ཆེན] in one office for one and a half years. He said that Ngabö was saying, "It is not the matter whether Tibet will gain [Tib. ཐོབ] the independence or not, but it is a matter of whether Tibet will be able to be [Tib. ཐུབ] independent or not." Even Ngabö Rinchen didn't like the reforms and he was saying that we should preserve the benefit negative aspects [Tib. གྱོང] as little as possible.   

**Q:**  Do you think that in any case, the only way was to make war? In the beginning, they signed the 17-Point Agreement but after a while they made the war and revolt took place.   

**A:**  As you said, if there were more people like Ngabö who could think about matters broadly, it was possible [without war]. But, on one side Chusghigandru and those people were too stubborn and on this side, they [the Chinese] did reforms excessively. If there were more people like Liu Geping [moderates] and if it had been done in a gentle [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] manner, maybe, the other side might become more aggressive, and if they still said that they will not agree, then what would happen? Chairman Mao said that the reforms should be done in a gentle manner. If I did it in a gentle manner and you din't do it, then some other people will come. I think there would have been trouble, but we could have made the trouble smaller. I am not an educated person like you, but I think the CCP had a big fault [Tib. སྐྱོན]. In the beginning, the Chinese or the CCP would have good motives [Tib. ཀུན་སློང] or purposes and would do something. If this worked out, then it was okay, but when it didn't work out, they would never accept their mistake. So they made a small mistake into a big mistake and the main fault is that then they blamed and put their own mistake on to others. For example, in China Chairman Mao did the so called the Great Leap Forward [Tib. མཆོངས་སྐྱོད་ཆེན་པོ] saying that they will "surpass Britain and catch up to America" [Ch. chao ying gan mei] and they will produce 1070 tons of steel. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> had produced only 90 ton of steel in 12 years. This was a good motivation, but it was done excessively and they even broke the pans of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> to make steel. They did such inconceivably foolish things. At that time, even Song Qingling also made steel in her courtyard. But when Peng Dehuai gave his opinion, saying that this is wrong, they accused him of being reactionary. In reality, they corrected their mistake and stopped making steel and didn't set up the People's Communes, but they never said that it had been a mistake. It is very hard for a Chinese to say I was wrong. The CCP is always talking about criticism and self-criticism, but they only criticize others and never do the self-criticism. Mao was like this, and even now Deng is also like this. Now we are saying that the Cultural Revolution was bad, but our leader of the Academy of Social Sciences [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཚན་རིག་ཁང] is saying that Mao's motivation was good and he did that as an experiment because there was corruption in the party. And they are saying that the Cultural Revolution was not wrong, but it was done too early. But now the corruption is becoming worse. I was an interpreter from 1956-1980 and in 1981 I came to the Academy of Social Sciences. For example, there were some mistakes in the works of the Marx and Engels and later they made the corrections. But when we check the works of Chairman Mao, they never mentioned that in the past this was wrong and now we made this correction. Rather, they would just erase that part of the document. So starting from the first book of Mao Zedong in 1921, all of his books were correct and there were no mistake at all. Similarly, the works of Deng Xiaoping didn't have any mistakes because the former mistakes were all deleted. [laughs]   

**Q:**  They didn't realize their own problems.   

**A:**  Even if they realized them, they would not accept them.   

**Q:**  I feel disappointed because they lost their opportunity like water passing under the bridge.   

**A:**  Yes. You are a professor and writing books and I am also writing some books, so we should write from both sides. As for the Dalai Lama, it is not possible for whatever he said to be true because on the one hand, his knowledge could be limited, and on the other hand, due to the political needs, he didn't have any choice but to say that. So the distance became bigger.   

**Q:**  Some hard liner people in Dharamsala are stubborn and they purposely did things that made the relations become bad.   

**A:**  In China also there are such people. According to my opinion, actually, they didn't have to do that, but they are still very stubborn. On March 10th this year, they published an article in the Tibet Daily Newspaper [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་ཉིན་རེའི་གསར་འགྱུར]. You might have read it?   

**Q:**  No.   

**A:**  They wrote very aggressively like the wordings that were used during the Cultural Revolution. They mentioned the name of the Dalai Lama and how he opposed Tibet.   

**Q:**  Most of the people on both side are good, but there are few hard liners. So we should think about the methods. If you pull back and forth like a doll [Tib. ཨ་ལས་པད་ཀོག], then the situation will become worse.   

**A:**  Last year, I went to India and I went to all the Great Monastic Seats because the Academy of Social Science is very loose [open-minded]. But they [the monks] were suspicious that I could be a Chinese spy and said that other Chinese are not allowed to come, but you are allowed to come. Later, I got an introduction letter from Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ] Rimpoche who is in Germany to show at Drepung. I was not allowed to show it to the Bureau Officer [Tib. དོན་གཅོད] and to the Indian Government. I went directly to Nyagre [Tib. ཉག་རེ] Khamtsen and then I went to Drepung's Phara Khamtsen and they talked with me. There was nobody who knew me, but I told them that I am from Ba. When people went to India when the Dalai Lama gave the Kalachakra Initiation in 1985, I was in Beijing. Then when I told them about the situation in Ba, they said you are really from Ba. [laughs] Then they helped and gave me food and they entertained me. I was taken to all the pilgrimage sites in the monastery.   

**Q:**  It is good. It should be like this.   

