# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, OH, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 2010  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He subsequently became a translator and cadre and later a researcher/author in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In this interview, he discusses his time as an interpreter at the important Sichuan Provincial meeting in December 1955 that was convened to approve implementing democratic reforms in Sichuan including the Tibetan area. He also discusses the start of the revolt in Litang and Batang.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_07/H_0060_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Regarding the meeting, I came down from Tibet in 1954 and I was the interpreter for the Dalai Lama's mother and Tseten Drölkar [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན་སྒོལ་དཀར] and in 1955, I also interpreted for the Dalai Lama. I did not interpret for him at such a young age because I had become an interpreter, but because they hadn't prepared the interpreter for the meeting. One of Li Jingquan's mistakes was that he said that the Tibetans did not need interpreters. The basic policy on the reforms was made by Chairman Mao, Premier Zhou, Li Weihan, and the United Front Bureau [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར་བུ]. Furthermore, I was mainly sent as the interpreter for Liu Geping. None of the documents were in Tibetan and they held the meeting in December [in Chengdu] in a very hasty manner [Tib. ཚ་གི་ཚི་གི]) and it was not well prepared. In October, they disbanded the Xikang Province and the meeting was held in November. So they didn't think that they needed interpreters. At that time, there were Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་སྟོབས་ལྡན], Jayang Palmo [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཔལ་མོ], and Pelgön Trinley [Tib. དཔལ་མགོན་འཕྲིན་ལས]. These three were called the three big chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་ཆེན་གསུམ]. In Aba there were the ones called Suo Guanying and Su Yunhe.   

**Q:**  Is Suo Guanying Chinese?   

**A:**  He is a Tibetan who was given a Chinese name. His Tibetan name is Sonam Tsering [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་ཚེ་རིང]. Su Yunhe was Chinese. There were many others and also many lamas who didn't know the language and when they needed an interpreter [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Are these all minority nationalities?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many representatives were there altogether?   

**A:**  There were a little over 20 and there were also the Yi nationality representatives. It was mainly the areas of Yi nationality and the Tibetan nationality.   

**Q:**  Q. Were there about 100-200 other people in the meeting?   

**A:**  There were about 1,000 people because Sichuan is a big province. At that time, Chongqing was also included in Sichuan. Among the 30 provinces all over the country, Sichuan has the highest population. So Han chauvinism [Tib. རྒྱ་རིགས་ཆེན་པོའི་རིང་ལུགས] was very strong and there was no interpreter. Since the democratic reforms was a big issue, they [Khambas] said that they didn't know Chinese, even though they knew a little bit of Chinese. They pretended that they didn't know. Whatever they said, they said in Chinese, "I don't know" [Ch. bu zhi dao], or they would use the Sichuan dialect and say, "I don't know" [Ch. bu xiao de]. Then I did the interpretating.   

**Q:**  Before the meeting, didn't the CCP members call the people like Jagö Tomden and explain to them about the meeting?   

**A:**  They didn't do anything. Therefore, later Liu Geping and the United Front Bureau criticized them, saying they were "not prepared well enough and leapt into work in a hurried manner" [Ch. zhunbei buzu/ cangcu shangzhen; Tib. གྲ་སྒྲིག་མ་ལྡང་པ། འཚབ་ཚུབ་ཀྱིས་ལས་ཀ་བྱས་པ]. Later, they held struggle sessions against Deng Xiaoping and Liu Geping. Liu Geping passed away. Liu Geping and I were friendly though he was a high leader. Later when he didn't have a job anymore, I would go to see him frequently. He would tell me things, like telling stories. When they said that they didn't know [Chinese], then they said, "we need an interpreter." Before that, when they held the meetings in Beijing, there was a secretariat [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ལས་ཁུང] in which they have a secretary team [Ch. mishu zu][Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཚོགས་ཆུང] which was important and even now, they are doing this. And they would make the preparations and there was another team called the administrative team [Tib. ཧུཨིཝུ་ཟུ] that would prepare cars, housing, and giving parties, etc. For the minority nationality, they specially set up the translation team [Ch. fan yi zu; Tib. ཡིག་སྒྱུར་ཚོགས་ཆུང] which was a subordinate of the secretary team. At the Second Provincial Congress of the Sichuan Province [Tib. ཟི་ཁྲོན་ཞིང་ཆེན་གྱི་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་ཐེངས་གཉིས་པ], there were no translators. In reality, they [Khambas] didn't know the political terms of the reforms, so Tashi Tsering was the main translator. He died last year. He was the zhuren of the main office [Ch. ban gong shi zhu ren][Tib. གཞུང་ལས་ཁང་གི་ཞུ་རེན] of the Autonomous Region. He was a leader and also a representative, so he was told to be the leader of the translators and all of a sudden, they told them to call the students who could be interpreters from the Chengdu Institute of Nationalities [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ].   

**Q:**  When you came there, how many days had passed since the meeting started?   

**A:**  It had been 2-3 days since the meeting started and they [the Khambas] said that no matter what they told them, they were like mute and deaf [Tib. ལྐུགས་པ་འོན་གོག] people. And at that time, there were three documents which they later announced. I don't remember the full names of the documents. It was called the "resolution on implementing the democratic reforms in the Tibetan nationality and Yi nationality areas in Sichuan" [Tib. ཟི་ཁྲོན་ཞིང་ཆེན་གྱི་བོད་རིགས་དང་ཡི་རིགས་ས་ཁུལ་དུ་དམངས་གཙོའི་བཅོས་སྒྱུར་བྱེད་པའི་གྲོས་ཆོད] and they had to sign the resolutions. They had thought a lot on the matter. There was also a speech to be given by Jagö Tomden which was already prepared by the Sichuan United Front Bureau. They made him give the speech in Chinese even though he didn't know Chinese. Later, they made Tashi Tsering and me translate his speech. Tashi Tsering, being a leader, was very busy and was also not diligent about work. He has been working as the zhuren of the main office since he was 24 years old. In 1955, it had been several years since he had become a small leader. The speech was not that long, with only 2,000-3,000 characters, so I translated it in one night. If I said that I translated it, they wouldn't have believed me, so I said Tashi Tsering and I translated it. Jagö Tomden's speech was also in Chinese and not in Tibetan. The content of his speech was "we must do the reforms and I respect [Tib. བརྩི་བཀུར] the reforms. It was just for expressing his attitude.   

**Q:**  If it was written in Chinese, how could he read it?   

**A:**  They were just disregarding [Tib. སྣང་མེད་བཏང] him [Jagö Tomden]. They didn't care whether Jagö Tomden was expressing his attitude or not. This was just to tell the outside and put it in newspapers that the resolution was agreed on by all [Tib. གྲོས་འཆམ་སྤྱི་མོས] and that the high ranking people led by Jagö Tomden were respecting it.   

**Q:**  When you came there, did the Khambas ask you, "What is going on in the meeting? Please explain it to us" ?   

**A:**  No, they didn't ask me because they [Jagö Tomden, etc.] were high chiefs and stayed in a different place than us, the cadres, so I would not meet them except at the meeting. They were staying in a separate house.   

**Q:**  In the meeting, while somebody spoke in Chinese, would you sit next to them [Jagö Tomden, etc.] and say quietly that they were saying such and such things?   

**A:**  Yes. When they held the meeting, we did that. There was not anything like telling them in advance about the meeting. In the meeting, we would get there before they [Jagö Tomden, etc.] came.   

**Q:**  Q. Do you sit next to Jagö Tomden, etc., in the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, in the meeting we sat together and during the meeting, they would ask many questions. At that time, in Beijing they had simultaneous translation, but we didn't have that in Sichuan. There were just several interpreters - about 10 of them. So, they [Jagö Tomden, etc.] would just listen and understand as much as they could and if they couldn't, they would just overlook it. That's why the trouble arose. This was because there was an eight character basic policy ( put forward by Li Jingquan that said: "direct transition and reach the sky with one bound" [Ch. zhi jie guo du/ yi bu deng tian; Tib. ཐད་ཀའི་བར་བརྒལ། གོམ་པ་རྒྱག་ཐེངས་གཅིག་ལ་གནམ་ལ་སླེབས་པ].   

**Q:**  How old were you?   

**A:**  In 1955, I was 17 years old. They [Li Jingquan] were strong. 'Direct transition' means you do not need to teach Tibetan and Yi language in the schools. They were saying that the landlords were very bad and the masses didn't have cultural knowledge. It was true that in the Tibetan areas there were no schools. They [Li Jingquan etc] were saying "If you first learn Tibetan and then learn Chinese, you will neither know Tibetan nor Chinese and if the Tibetan cadres go out of Dartsedo [to China], they will not get food and jobs. Instead of doing this, you must learn Chinese directly. They [Li Jingquan, etc] were saying that they were showing consideration for the Tibetan people.   

**Q:**  Did they say that in the meeting?   

**A:**  No, this was the basic policy. They were saying openly that we must demolish the nationality language [Tib. མི་རིགས་སྐད་ཡིག་མེད་པ་བཟོ].   

**Q:**  Did Li Jingquan say that?   

**A:**  Yes, he said that openly. In 1956, just after the constitution came out in which protecting the nationality and preserving the language was written about, he [Li Jingquan] said that this was unnecessary. He said that he was concerned with the Tibetans and that in reality, if you didn't know Chinese, you would not get your food after you came to Chengdu.   

**Q:**  Did he [Li Jingquan] mean by the direct transition mainly about the language?   

**A:**  Yes, he meant mainly about the language. Later, it was said that they [Chinese] were demolishing the language. They said that we could do the direct transition and then we didn't need interpreters.   

**Q:**  What was the second?   

**A:**  The second was "reaching the sky with one bound". This was at the end of 1955 when they did the reforms. In 1956, Chairman Mao said that nationwide, we must move to socialism. They set up the collectives [Tib. མཉམ་ལས་ཁང]. In the past when they set up the collectives, they said that there was[first] a mutual aid team [Tib. རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང] in the Chinese areas. First they did land reforms and held struggle sessions against the landlords and then they set up the low-level and high-level collectives [Ch. diji she/ gaoji she]. They said that we didn't need to go step by step and that we must set up the collective right after the land reforms and "reach the sky with one bound." However, the United Front Bureau said they were "not prepared well enough and leapt into work in a hurried manner." This was the contradiction and the struggle between these two sides. It was not because they were inattentive that they said we didn't need interpreters, but they purposely said that we didn't need interpreters. Later when they [Khambas] shouted that they needed interpreters, then they made Tashi Tsering, who was a representative and also a leader of the reception, take the responsibility for the interpreters. Tashi Tsering was the Vice Prefecture Leader [Ch. zhouzhang; Tib. གཞོན་པ], Tian Bao was the Prefecture Leader, and Fan Zhizhong was the Party Secretary. Jayang Palmo was the Vice Prefecture Leader. Tashi Tsering was the director [Ch. zhuren] of the main office [Ch. bangong shi zhuren].   

**Q:**  Was he a Khamba?   

**A:**  He is from Ba. When he was told to take charge, he called several of us who he knew from the Institute of Nationalities to be interpreters. As soon as we were called, we stayed in the guest house and the representatives were also staying in the guest house because it was just after the liberation, and there wasn't any big guest house where all the representatives could stay and they were all scattered. They [Jagö Tomden, etc.] were leaders, but later we knew that they were not leaders and they didn't let them return [to Kham]. At that time, when they [Jagö Tomden, etc.] were called to the meeting, they were kept in the house called Sandong Qiao where there was a bridge with three holes. Nowadays, this house is the Reception Center of the Nationality Committee [Ch. min wei zhaodai suo]. At that time, there was no reception center. They built this house and prepared it to hold them there and keep them from returning. This house had a good view and was regarded as a good house according to the situation then. They took care of their livelihood and told them not to meddle in the situation in Kham. It was not for detaining [Tib. བཀག་ཉར] them for good. They were told, "You can be the pömbo and we will not make your livelihood worse. However, when we do the reforms to the masses, do not meddle in it." At that time, we didn't know about that. Later, I came to know that was their policy then.   

**Q:**  So after the meeting they said that these guys had to stay, right?   

**A:**  No, they let them stay in that house right after they came to Chengdu. That's why I told you that we were not together. And it was the house where they were held, but they didn't use that word [Tib. བཀག]. They told them that they were not allowed to go from there.   

**Q:**  How did they tell them? Did they tell them "don't go home"?   

**A:**  In the beginning, when they [Khambas] came, we didn't know that because they were leaders and we were students and we didn't have relations. When they came, the house was not completely built. Most of the house was completed in 1958. However, they prepared a big space for that, You can see the Sandong Qiao is a very big place now. At that time, it was an empty space where they built several houses and each of them was going to have a building, though it was not completed. At that time, each of them had an apartment which was enough because their family members hadn't come.   

**Q:**  They should have told them a reason for them to stay there, right? What did they tell them when the meeting was over?   

**A:**  After the meeting, they told them "Now, you people stay here. They are doing the democratic reforms over there and you have to be the leaders (Tib. གོཏྲི [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད])." They were saying that because they were in the province and were selected as the representatives of the Sichuan Province after the Xikang Province was disbanded. In the past, the area was Ganzi Prefecture and then it became Xikang Province. Later, they [Jagö Tomden, etc.] even became the uyön of the Sichuan Province and Tashi Zhuren was not even a representative of the Provincial Congress of the Sichuan Province. At that time, Tian Bao was an uyön, not a Chairman [Ch. wei yuan zhang] of the National People's Congress. They told them to stay there and when they said that they are going back, they told them not to go. Therefore, it is said that there is a reason for the Khambas to tell the [Dalai Lama] not to go to the Military Headquarters in 1959. Even Tan Guansan didn't know about that. I wrote this in his biography. Tan Guansan said that he didn't have any plans to keep the Dalai Lama. This was what I heard later on.   

**Q:**  Do you think there was a plan to keep the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Tan Guansan said that he didn't have that plan.   

**Q:**  Did Tan Guansan himself tell you?   

**A:**  Not to me personally, but he has said that. In 1955, when they were kept, they were worried and they were making a lot of connections [Tib. འབྲེལ་བ] by sending letters because there were no telephones and they were not allowed to send telegraphs. So they sent people. The motor road was also very bad, but they used vehicles because they had money and power. They asked what was happening in Ganzi and Derge.   

**Q:**  How did the Tibetans agree and approve the resolution at the meeting?   

**A:**  They just raised their hands. Not only Tibetans-this was a resolution on the Provincial Congress of the Sichuan Province where there were about 400-500 Chinese and the cadres. They didn't discuss this well and just raised hands. That's why the United Front Bureau criticized them.   

**A:**  It seemed to me that they didn't have any preparation and any idea about how they would do the reforms, though they did have the mental preparation that they would do the reforms. At that time, the CCP had already done the land reforms in the Chinese nationality areas up to Luding. They also had done the land reforms in the 2-3 villages in the Chinese areas in Dartsedo. Therefore, they knew that sooner or later, they would do the reforms in the Tibetan areas.   

**Q:**  The Khambas didn't ask any questions at the meeting?   

**A:**  As far as I know, they didn't ask any questions. They just "yes, yes" (Tib. lags so lags so] and then they raised their hands.   

**Q:**  What happened after that? Then your interpreter work was finished, right?   

**A:**  Yes, then we returned the school and then the trouble started because they didn't let them return. So they got agitated and Jagö Tomden was very aggressive and he said "you are telling us lies and you are not letting us return." They were like prisoners, and the word prisoner was used by them at that time.   

**Q:**  Jagö Tomden told whom?   

**A:**  He told their leaders. At that time, Li Jingquan and those people were not coming there.   

**Q:**  Jagö Tomden told which leader that they were prisoners?   

**A:**  Probably they only told the United Front Bureau and the General Office [Ch. ban gong ting]. The high leaders like Li Jingquan and Liao Zhigao would not meet them at all. Then they [Khambas] were agitated and said "when we go to Beijing we can meet Premier Zhou and Li Buzhang, but when we come here, why don't we meet you people? You are forcing us to stay here" [Tib. ང་ཚོ་བཀག་བྱུང]. They neither met the leaders, nor did they let them to go their homeland and they became prisoners. Therefore, Jagö Tomden asked, "are we prisoners?"   

**Q:**  What did they answer?   

**A:**  There was nobody answering [laughs] and there was nothing to answer [Tib. ལན་རྒྱག་ཡག་ཡོད་མ་རེད]. At that time, they [Khambas] didn't know that the disturbances [Tib. ཟིང་ལངས] had started. When they were kept in Chgengdu, they might have been nervous because they had sent the Work Teams to the Kham Aba Autonomous Prefecture [Tib. རྔ་པ་རང་སྐྱོང་ཞོཨུ], the Ganzi Aba Autonomous Prefecture, and the Liangshan Autonomous Prefecture to do the reforms. These were called the three prefectures. Xichang Town was the place in Yi nationality where they sent the satellite. In the past, Xichang Town and Liangshan Yi nationality were two places, but now Xichang Town was merged into the Liangshan Yi nationality. At that time, they were calling it three autonomous prefectures and one area. The three autonomous prefectures were the Aba Autonomous Prefecture [Tib. རྔ་པ་རང་སྐྱོང་ཞོཨུ], the Ganzi Aba Autonomous Prefecture, and the Liangshan Autonomous Prefecture and the one area was Xichang Town.   

**Q:**  When they held the meeting, the Yi nationality rebelled, right? Did you hear about that when you were at the meeting?   

**A:**  At that time, there were two different Yi nationalities. Some were like Tian Bao, who had been among the ones who went for the Red Army Long March [Tib. དམར་དམག་རྒྱང་སྐྱོད]. They also had chiefs [Tib. འགོ་པ] who were also kept in Sandong Qiao, who said, "You are not doing what you said you would do. In the past, you said that you would do peaceful reforms"   

**Q:**  I heard that while the meeting was going on, the rebellion started in the Yi nationality areas. Is that true?   

**A:**  Probably not during the meeting. It probably was after the meeting.   

**Q:**  One important thing is that when Jagö Tomden, etc. were told to be the leaders, did they know that the Work Teams were sent?   

**A:**  Yes, they knew because when the leaders held the meeting, they said that they were going to send the Work Teams.   

**Q:**  At that time, were Jagö Tomden, etc. in that meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. And they [Jagö Tomden, etc.] said that they were going to go with the Work Team, but they were stopped. They let the Chinese take the responsibility for the work.   

**Q:**  So they didn't have any power, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then they sent the Work Team, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I joined the PLA in 1950 and in 1951, I went to my homeland and Lhasa. Then I didn't go home and asked for leave and went to my homeland along with the Work Team. I was the first one going to Ba after the liberation. I was with Bapa Phünwang and Dong Changming in 1951, and we separated from Ba and went to Tibet. At that time, there was no motor road in Ba and there was no guest house. We traveled with the muleteers. We could not travel alone without the muleteers, so I was glad to go with the Work Team because I didn't need to worry about food and that stuff.   

**Q:**  Was that a Military [Tib. དྲག་པོ] Work Team from the beginning?   

**A:**  Yes, it was called Armed Work Team [Ch. wu zhuang gong zuo dui] in which there were not soldiers, but there were local cadres and Tibetans. From that time, they had violated the peaceful reforms.   

**Q:**  How many people were with you?   

**A:**  They didn't send the Work Team from Chengdu. They made the plan in Chengdu, but the most of the people [in the Work Team] were in Dartsedo.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the Work Team with which you came?   

**A:**  There were about 40-50 people in the Work Team from Ba and there were some leaders from Chengdu.   

**Q:**  Did you come from Chengdu to Dartsedo?   

**A:**  I went with the Work Team from Chengdu to Dartsedo by vehicle. At that time, it was called the Land Reform Work Team [Ch. tu gai gong zuo dui] and I didn't know the leaders because I went in a vehicle. But when I arrived in Dartsedo, there were the Work Teams from the 21 counties. I went to find the Work Team from Ba and they told the Work Team to take me up with them. When we left Chengdu, most of them were Chinese leaders and there were just 1-2 Tibetans. Then from Chengdu, they sent three Work Teams: a Ganzi Prefecture Work Team [Ch. ganzi zhou gong zuo dui], an Aba Prefecture Work Team [Ch. a ba zhou gong zuo dui], and a Liangshan Work Team. When they arrived there they were divided. When I went from Chengdu to Dartsedo, there was no bus and we came in trucks and sat with the loads. I didn't have money except one month's salary because I was going for vacations and didn't have any gifts to take. After we arrived at Dartsedo, we rode horses and walked to Ba and when we reached Litang, the Litang revolt [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  How many days would it take on horseback from Litang to Dartsedo?   

**A:**  I don't remember well, it probably takes about 7-8 days. In between that, there was only one county called Nyagchuka [Tib. ཉག་ཆུ་ཁ]. We went from Dartsedo to Yajiang to Nyagchukha to Litang. After I arrived Litang, I bought some meat and butter to be used for the New Year Losar [Tib. ལོ་གསར] in Ba. I kept the butter but the meat was rotten. It was said that the revolt took place before the Losar in Ba, but the revolt didn't take place in Litang. Therefore, there are different accounts. Some say that the first gunshot was in Golok Serta [Tib. མགོ་ལོག་གསེར་རྟ], and some say that it was shot in Ba, and some say it was shot in Litang. Anyway, when I was in Litang, the revolt hadn't taken place in Litang and I heard that it took place in Ba. After several days, they shot at the monastery when we were in the county committee [compound][Ch. xian wei].   

**Q:**  When you travelled on horseback with the Work Team, what were they talking about on the way? Were they thinking that it would be difficult because they [Khambas] were strong?   

**A:**  At that time, all of us were youths and it was a very happy and carefree time and there some Chinese. At that time, many Tibetans were already recruited into the cadre ranks after they graduated from the Nationality Cadres School [Ch. min ganxiao][Tib. མི་རིགས་ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ] in Dartsedo. The Mationality Cadre School was set up in 1951 and during the years 1952-53-54, they trained several hundred cadres. There were some students from the Southwest Institute of Nationalities [Tib. ལྷོ་ནུབ་མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] who were sent in the Work Team, as well as some Chinese PLA. Most of the cadres had guns like mauser pistols [Ch. shi zi lan kru] and American guns called Carbine Chang [Ch. qiang]. I was the only one without a gun because I was a student.   

**Q:**  Did they train them in Dartsedo?   

**A:**  No, that's why it was said "not prepared well enough and pitched into work in a hurried manner."   

**Q:**  When they left Dartsedo, they didn't know what to do, right?   

**A:**  They knew that they were going to do the reforms and they had three documents. They didn't know how to do the reforms. They only knew that we had to do them fast.   

**Q:**  Altogether how many people were there in the Batang Work Team?   

**A:**  Usually, when the Work Team came to a county, they would call many cadres from that county into the Work Team because at that time the main work was the reforms. When I told you that there were about 40 people, that was when we went together from Dartsedo. It is like nowadays, when they send Work Teams to the monasteries. At that time, it was really not prepared well, so we didn't have enough tents to stay in, so the leaders would stay in the tents and the others didn't have tents to stay in. They would make a bonfire and dance and sing and the youths would make friends. I was the only one who came from the Institute of Nationalities and I was treated well. I stayed with the women because we Tibetans didn't care about that, but the other youths didn't want to stay in the tents and they would dance and sing. We didn't have any idea that the disturbance would take place.   

**Q:**  How was the situation when you reached Litang?   

**A:**  Litang was in a relaxed mode [Tib. ལྷོད་ལྷོད]. I went to the monastery because it was my first time going to Litang. Previously when I went to Lhasa I went via Mankham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས]. We also went to see the Litang market and bought meat and butter for the New Year. At that time, we didn't have much money, but the things were abundant. I saw Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན] for the first time, he was the one who was killed in the revolt. At that time, he was the Vice County Leader [Ch. fu xian zhang] of the Litang County. In the past, Yönrupön had first fought a battle with the 18th Army [Ch. shi ba jun]. At that time, Yönrupön came to see him saying, "We are neighbors. There are many knowledgeable people in Ba, so in the future when you develop Ba, you have to help us." He was a young and imposing person and spoke frankly (Tib. rdab rdob]. I was the teacher and I had a white complexion and was wearing a clean PLA uniform. So he asked where am I from and I told him that I am a teacher and am in the PLA, so he said that is good. The other members of the Work Team had taken off their uniforms. I made a good impression on him. Later when I came back, he had been killed, and they claimed that he was the chief culprit in the revolt in Litang and that he was shot with a sten gun and his stomach was made to look like a beehive.   

**Q:**  When you met him was he working for the government?   

**A:**  He came to meet us as a leader, the Vice County Leader.   

**Q:**  The Khambas outside were saying that he got the name of a leader, but he said that wouldn't work. That was a lie, right?   

**A:**  The Khambas would say outside that they didn't cooperate with the Chinese and this was their bragging (Tib. བོརཤོ [འབོར་ཤོབ]). [laughs]. He was taking the dayang [ coins in salary] then.   

**Q:**  Did he ask you how the reforms would be done?   

**A:**  He was educating us and didn't ask questions. Except for me, all the others were from the Work Team from Ba and he was from Litang and he was asking us about our accommodations and food. We in Litang only have butter and meat. At that time, we didn't need to buy these things because everything belonged to the CCP and we were eating from the big pot. At that time, he was not worried about the reforms and he was happy and was asking us whether we have enough food and whether we are happy. "You must relax and stay in Litang. If meat and the butter is not enough, we will give you more. You should eat well." He didn't have any ideas of opposing the reforms and wasn't worried about it. Therefore, I didn't believe it when I heard that he was the main culprit of the revolt at that time. So for over 50 years I have never criticized [Tib. དགག་པ] him and I have kept quiet. Litang was a poor place and we stayed in the reception center which was a one-story house. In one room 4-5 people had to stay and we ate from the coommon mess (Tib. ཇིཐབ [སྤྱི་ཐབ]).   

**Q:**  Where did you stay in Litang?   

**A:**  There was only one Litang County receptioc house [Ch. litang xian zhao dai suo].   

**Q:**  What did you call that government house?   

**A:**  It was called the Litang County reception (house). Later, there was a guest house [Tib. མགྲོན་ཁང].   

**Q:**  I don't know the places in Litang so did you call the monastery Litang Chöde [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ]?   

**A:**  It was called Champaling [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གླིང]. The monastery was in the east and there were many stupas on the wall of the monastery. It was said that there were 108 stupa, though I didn't count them. And there was an old town [Ch. lao cheng][Tib. གྲོང་ཁྱེར་རྙིང་པ] and there was a new town [Ch. xin cheng][Tib. གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གསར་པ] where there was the county committee [Ch. xian wei][Tib. rdzong uyön lhan khang] and the county government [Ch. rdzong gi srid gzhung] and then the reception and we were staying in the reception and the county committee [compound].   

**Q:**  Were the reception and the county committee in the same courtyard?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there a magar (regiment) there ?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, it was called the Public Security Squadron [Ch. gong an zhong dui].   

**Q:**  Where was this located?   

**A:**  It was located at a little bit of a distance and at that time, there was only one squadron, which means a middle battalion [Tib. རུ་ཁག་འབྲིང་བ]. This was not the PLA. They were called security soldiers [Tib. བདེ་འཇགས་དམག་མི].   

**Q:**  Where did they block the water?   

**A:**  They cut off the water at the new town where the county committee was. We stayed in the place where there was the county committee and the reception center. At that time, I didn't see many soldiers and I was not attentive because we didn't have any relations with the soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were the soldiers already there or did they come especially?   

**A:**  They were already there,, but later on soldiers came specially.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there?   

**A:**  In general, in one squadron, there were about little over 100 soldiers. At that time, according to the custom of the CCP, it was called the Public Security Squadron and each county had one squadron. However, the number of people in the squadron was not same and depended on the situation. In the counties they had a squadron and in the qu and the towns they had a squad [Ch. xiao dui]. The one in Dartsedo was called the Public Security Battalion [Ch. gong an da dui] and later it was changed to Public Security Regiment [Ch. gong an zong dui] [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་རུ་ཁག]. For example, now, they call it the Public Security Regiment of the TAR. They [the rebels] cut off the water at the new town.   

**Q:**  How far is the monastery from the old town?   

**A:**  It was not a long distance. You can see it. It must be about 2-3 kilometers away. People used to go for the circumambulation around that place. The new and old town were almost joined together. There were many shops in the old town and there were many work units in the new town and the primary school was also nearby.   

**Q:**  In the same courtyard, what other work units were there other than the county committee and the reception?   

**A:**  There were some small shops in that courtyard and the county committee government house. At that time, it was not that squeezed. The county committee and county government were there, and there were not many people. It was like one work unit and the reception was nearby. On the right and the left side, there were some shops and the cadres hostels and hostels for the leaders of the county committee.   

**Q:**  The courtyard had a fence (Tib. ཇགྲི [ལྕགས་རི]), right?   

**A:**  Yes. According to the custom of the CCP, they were on alert from the early times and they had built a fence.   

**Q:**  What kind of fence was that? Was it high?   

**A:**  No. It was built with pounded earth [Tib. གྱང].   

**Q:**  How many gates were there?   

**A:**  There was one gate. It might have have gates on the four directions, but the compound was not that safe because at the time of the liberation, there was a relaxed atmosphere [Tib. ལྷོད་ལྷོད]. On the two sides of the main gate, they hung boards on which it was written "Litang County committee and Litang County government".   

**Q:**  Was the fence taller than me?   

**A:**  It was like the height of a man standing, and we could climb it when we have some work to do and if the gate was closed. At that time, they were not that alert and the fence was not for making war. It was just a demarcation of the place indicating that this is our place and for stopping thieves.   

**Q:**  How long did you wait there for the Losar after you bought the meat and the butter?   

**A:**  When we were about to leave, probably, they received a telegraph from above, though I didn't know that. At that time, we didn't have phones and the telegraphs were used when they contacted the Work Teams. The Chinese leader told us, "Wait for two days, the higher ups are saying not to come and wait a for awhile in Litang."   

**Q:**  They didn't tell you the reason, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, I was anxious because the Losar was about to approach and the meat was rotten. Since the liberation, I had never spend my Losar (New Year) at home and my home couldn't make contact with me. I sent a telegraph saying that I was coming for the Losar and I was about to reach there. So my home members were waiting for me. Then all of a sudden I heard that the revolt took place in Ba, so I don't know if the revolt took place first in Ba or Litang. The people in Ba were saying that the revolt took place first in Litang and people in Litang were saying that the revolt took place first in Ba. We were told that the revolt took place in Ba and after few days, they told us not to go outside.   

**Q:**  Was this before the Losar?   

**A:**  Yes. It was at the end of the 1955.   

**Q:**  Did they mean you should not go outside of the courtyard?   

**A:**  Yes, outside of the courtyard of the county committee. So we couldn't go. The others didn't care and they were just making friends because they were youths. I was the only one who was anxious.   

**Q:**  At that time, did they prepare for making war?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. I was a soldier and I found that they were not prepared for making war.   

**Q:**  They [Khambas] were saying the Khambas and lamas were called to a meeting in a house called [Ch. jiaowu chang]. What was that? Was there a place called [Ch. jiaowu chang] in Litang where they used to do the military training like we have in Lhasa, etc?   

**A:**  There was a place called [Ch. cao chang] which means the place for physical exercise. I don't know whether there was a [Ch. jiaowu chang]. Probably, there was. I don't know. Did they say that they held a meeting there?   

**Q:**  It was a very important meeting at which they [Chinese] said that there are two paths, a white and black, and they told them to hand over their guns. Some Khambas said that they took out their guns.   

**A:**  The so called [Ch. jiaowu chang] was set up since the Qing Dynasty for military training.   

**Q:**  Was there a house there?   

**A:**  Yes, but I don't know where the [Ch. jiaowu chang] was located in Litang. Probably, they took out guns and then I heard that the revolt took place in Litang. And they were shooting towards us and when they cut off the water, I was in Litang.   

**Q:**  Were the cadres of the county in In that courtyard?   

**A:**  All of us were in that courtyard and this was the place where they blocked the water.   

**Q:**  Was that the new town?   

**A:**  The water in the irrigation canal [Tib. རྐ] flowed from the monastery side and I could hear the gun shots, but not a single person was killed in the courtyard and they [Khambas] could not enter the courtyard.   

**Q:**  How did you know that they blocked the water? At that time, Amdo Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན] was there.   

**A:**  Do you mean the chairman of TAR?   

**Q:**  Yes. He wrote an article that said he sent a person and the Tibetans waited at the back side and shot that person.   

**A:**  It is impossible that Dorje Tseden was in Litang. At that time, he was the leader of the Lhasa Primary School and they were preparing for the TAR.   

**Q:**  Maybe, it was another person with the same name.   

**A:**  Yes, that could be.   

**Q:**  How did you know that they blocked the water?   

**A:**  The water in the irrigation canal flowed from the mountain and they blocked the water flow. They also did that in Ba. At that time, people didn't die though they fired some guns back and forth and I could hear the gunshots. When we heard that the revolt had taken place, the youths were still dancing and singing and making friends.   

**Q:**  They didn't fire guns when they blocked the water, right?   

**A:**  When they blocked the water, they [Khambas] were shooting against us. And many monks came out from the monastery which they called monk soldiers (Tib. ཏྲམག [གྲྭ་དམག]) in Litang. Probably, it had been several days during the Losar.   

**Q:**  When they blocked the water, how did you get water?   

**A:**  We could bring water from many places and there were many rivers. The so-called 'block the water' was one method.   

**Q:**  Could you go to fetch water?   

**A:**  Yes, we didn't have a problem with drinking water though they told us that they had blocked the water.   

**Q:**  The Khambas were saying that they blocked the water, but you were lucky that it snowed and you drank snow water.   

**A:**  How could we drink snow water [Tib. གངས་ཆུ་འཐུང་ཡག་ཅི་དག་ག་པར་ཡོད་རེད] At that time, I was there.   

**Q:**  Was it the same time when they fired guns and blocked the water?   

**A:**  Yes, and they were thinking of entering the courtyard to destroy both the county committee and the county government, but they couldn't enter. At that time, one squadron could stop them.   

**Q:**  Where were the soldiers?   

**A:**  Probably, the soldiers were around the courtyard. However, I didn't see many soldiers though I was a soldier. Probably, the soldiers were at the left and right side of the courtyard where the county committee and the county government and reception was. When they made war, they [soldiers] would protect them.   

**Q:**  You mean then the squadron came and protected them, right?   

**A:**  I only heard that the gun shots and didn't see them fighting each other. We also wouldn't dare to go out because we were told not to go out. On the one hand, since I was in the PLA, I had to adhere to the discipline and on the other hand, if I would be shot meaninglessly (Tib. dönme gömep [དོན་མེད་དགོས་མེད]), I would not be able to go home and go to my work unit.   

**Q:**  Was this before the Losar?   

**A:**  Yes. Not long after that, many PLA came from China.   

**Q:**  Before that, after some time, Yönrupön and the people in the monastery fought the battle against the Chinese.   

**A:**  It was the same time when they fought the battle and they blocked the water.   

**Q:**  Many people went and burned the old town and they killed 20-30 Chinese cadres in the payroll office [Tib. ཕོགས་ཁང], right?   

**A:**  At that time, there were several series of events. I think it was not one time [fighting] though there are different ways of saying what happened from both sides. Some of us were saying that Li Jingquan and those people played a trick (Tib. ཡོགྱུ [གཡོ་སྒྱུ]). The first [fighting] one was that I saw myself and at that time, they didn't destroy the monastery.   

**Q:**  I mean the payroll office.   

**A:**  If they set fire in the old town, we could have seen it from the new town because it was not far away. I heard the gun shots firing back and forth and also the sound of PLA's machine guns and I also heard the Khambas yelling [Tib. ཀི་སྒྲ]. Then, not long after that, the soldiers came after the Losar. Later, I came to know that that was the first regiment of the Public Security Force [Ch. gong an yi tuan] and later the fourth regiment of the Public Security Force [[Ch. gong an si tuan] came to Litang and the first regiment of the Public Security Force came to Ba. When the soldiers came, the people who were blocking [the water] withdrew. At that time, Yönrupön was not dead and they didn't make a big war.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there?   

**A:**  I don't know the number. First there was the squadron and when they blocked the water and fired their guns a little bit, the first regiment of the Public Security Force came. However, I didn't know that they were the first regiment of the Public Security Force. When the first regiment of the Public Security Force came, the Khambas fled and the situation calmed a bit. After the Losar, I went with the Work Team to Ba and the revolt hadn't take place in Ba and it was calm there. They told me not to come because the revolt took place in Ba. Actually the revolt didn't take place in Ba. There was a little bit of trouble with this.   

**Q:**  The Khambas were saying that they fought the battle against the courtyard of county committee and they fought at the gate.   

**A:**  Yes, but they couldn't get in.   

**Q:**  They came to destroy the gate, but couldn't get in. Do you remember what happened on that day?   

**A:**  It is not like they did that for 1-2 days, they came near the gate and they fired guns and when the soldiers shot at them they ran away and again they yelled and came near the gate.   

**Q:**  They couldn't enter the courtyard, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I didn't see any people who were killed.   

**Q:**  At that time, the soldiers were in the courtyard, right?   

**A:**  What we had was one squadron and all the Work Team had guns, but they didn't fight the battle.   

**Q:**  Later, did the squadron come into the courtyard of the county?   

**A:**  They were guarding at the left and right side of the courtyard. So the Khambas didn't have the courage to enter the courtyard. The soldiers were at the forts [Tib. མཁར་རྫོང] located at the four directions. This was the way of making war and when they fired machine guns, the Khambas couldn't enter. Though at the time I didn't see it, I think there were three levels. When the PLA came, they [Khambas] couldn't do anything and the monastery remained as before and they didn't destroy it. Probably, it had been about a month since they fought the battle and they blocked the water. After the Losar, we went to Ba and on the way it was calm and the disturbance hadn't take place in Ba. Then the Ba Chöde Monastery rose up again and probably Litang also rose up again. So I think probably, setting fire and destroying the monastery happened at the later time. So we were saying, "the reactionaries are indeed reactionaries, though we tolerated once and twice, still they were doing that" [Tib. ལོག་སྤྱོད་པ་ནི་ལོག་སྤྱོད་པ་རང་རེད། ང་ཚོས་བཟོད་སྒོམ་ཐེངས་གཅིག་ཐེངས་གཉིས་བྱས་ཀྱང། ཁོ་ཚོས་དེ་འདྲ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འདུག]. Some say that they [Chinese] played a trick by telling them we are going to collect the guns [Khambas] and let them fire guns, so as to be able to suppress them. Then when the Khambas became aggressive and fought thinking the Chinese are not courageous [not finished]. So I think setting fire and destroying the monastery was after the Losar and blocking water was before the Losar. But I didn't see them setting fire.   

**Q:**  Did the Public Security Force come after the Losar?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Khambas said that there was a Regimental Command called the Webbed Finger [Tib. བྱ་ལག་ཅན] who was killed by Yönrupön. Was he the commander of the Public Security Force?   

**A:**  I don't know. But probably, he might be. However, the Khambas also brag a lot.   

**Q:**  The revolt in Litang was in March and the Losar was on the 12th of February.   

**A:**  Then it was exactly like what I told you. First they blocked the water and at that time they didn't destroy the monastery and set fires. After the Losar, we went to Ba.   

**Q:**  Was that after 1-2 weeks after the Losar?   

**A:**  Probably, one week after the Losar and after 2-3 days, they celebrated the butter sculptures festival [Tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ] on the 15th of the lunar month. I had a maternal uncle in Chöde Monastery and I went with my mother to the monastery to see him.   

**Q:**  How many days journey was it between Litang and the Ba.   

**A:**  At that time, there was a county called Tashö [?] County, which was called Yiding Xian [Ch. yi ding xian] in Chinese. Now, this county has been disbanded and some parts have been merged with Litang and some parts with Ba. From that county, it takes about one week to Ba.   

**Q:**  Was there a motor road?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  The big trouble in Litang took place after that. Did the additional soldiers come at the time of Losar?   

**A:**  They came around the Losar. I don't know how many soldiers came because all the soldiers would not come into the county committee compound. Anyway, when the soldiers came, they [Khambas] withdrew. At that time, I could hear gunshots and the Khambas yelling and I saw the dust of the horses galloping. But I was being careful and didn't dare to go out. I didn't even dare to go into the courtyard because I was told not to go. All the other people had their work units and I didn't have anything to meddle with, so I just watched from the window. The window was made from wood and it didn't have glass window panes. When I opened it, I could see clearly and when I shut it, it was dark.   

**Q:**  When the Work Team first came to Litang, they didn't hold the study sessions [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང], but after they came to do the reforms, then they did the preparations and held the meetings, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It is possible that they might have held the meeting like you said. But we didn't meddle into that and they [the Work Team] announced the three documents to the leaders of the county like the chairman and told them that we are going to do the reforms and it is possible that they might have told them [the Khambas] to hand over their guns. But I didn't know that because I was just a traveler. Some Work Teams were going to the chu and the chu where Yönrupön was at was called Mogyag Chu and they also went there. And Yönrupön was called Mogyag Thusi [Ch. tu si].   

**Q:**  When you were in Litang, the plane didn't come, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I told you that I saw the plane coming to Ba. It was very clear in the daytime and my younger brother was with me. I thought the plane was [dropping] things for our soldiers.   

**Q:**  How did they tell you all of the sudden that you can go to Batang from Litang?   

**A:**  The soldiers came to Litang so the ones who were blocking [the water] left. Then the Work Team told me that I could go and they had prepared the muleteers and horses. I didn't know who gave the order to the Work Team.   

**Q:**  Did the soldiers come with you people?   

**A:**  When I went, they were all Work Team members and there were no soldiers.   

**Q:**  Did you have any trouble on the way?   

**A:**  No, and then the real revolt took place in Ba. And many cadres gathered together and I was staying at home alone.   

**Q:**  When you arrived home, did your family members and the neighbors talk about the reforms that were going to start?   

**A:**  They were talking about that and the masses liked [the reforms] in general because we were poor, so they were saying we will get the land and the wealth divided and all of them liked it.   

**Q:**  Did your household have land?   

**A:**  No. We would lease our land from other people on half and half lease [Tib. ཤས] where half of the yield went to the owner and half went to the planter.   

**Q:**  Did you have chief or lord, a pön [Tib. དཔོན] in Batang like we had in Tibet where the miser belonged to them, like saying this miser belonged to Shelkar Lingpa [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིང་པ]?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. After the Manchu Emperor killed the head of Ba who was called the Ba Depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ] they demolished the system of the miser belonging to lords and they sent the Manchu leaders (Tib. pönpo). So there was no belonging to lords, like me belonging to Lhalu or Ngabö, etc., but there were differences between the rich and the poor. We were among the poor ones and the poor ones were glad when they heard that they would do the reforms and we would get land and wealth. Yönrupön was a nomad, so there they had some differences between the pön and others, but among the farmers, they didn't have that.   

**Q:**  At that time, in Batang, what were the percentages of rich, middle and poor?   

**A:**  I don't know much. However, in general, 10% were rich and 80% were poor. According to my opinion, the majority liked the democratic reforms and I also liked it. I was a cadre then and to tell you the truth, all the people I knew liked the democratic reforms and nobody opposed them. I also reported to the leaders that the trouble was when they bombed and destroyed the monastery. Then all the people were saying "there is no reason to trust what the Chinese say, who knows what would happen in the future; and the policy of the CCP is the like a wet skin hat" [Tib. རྒྱ་མིའི་ཁ་ལ་ཡིད་ཆེས་མི་འདུག། རྗེས་མ་ག་རེ་ཡོང་མིན་གང་ཤེས། གུང་ཕྲན་ཏང་གི་སྲིད་ཇུས་དེ་ཀོ་བ་རློན་པའི་ཞྭ་མོ་རེད]. They also said "it is like the mouth of a big horn, when you go in it is broad and then it becomes narrower and narrower at the end. First they destroyed the lamas and the monastery and in the future who knows what will they do to us. Probably the Chinese will come and occupy Tibet's territory" [Tib. དུང་ཆེན་ཁ་ནང་བཞིན་རེད། དང་པོ་ཡར་འཛུལ་དུས་གུ་ཡང་པོ་བྱས། དེ་ནས་དུང་ཆེན་ཁ་ནང་བཞིན་རེད། དང་པོ་བླ་མ་དང་དགོན་པ་དེ་ཚོ་གཏོར། རྗེས་མ་ང་ཚོ་ལ་ག་རེ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོད་མེད་གང་ཤེས། ཕལ་ཆེར་རྒྱ་ཡོང་ནས་བོད་ཀྱི་ས་ཆ་ཟིན་ས་རེད]. That's what I reported to the leaders. I kept quiet for a long time because after they destroyed the monastery, the people's minds changed and they prayed and did those things and the [positive] talk about the dividing the land in the reforms disappeared [Tib. མེད་པ་ཆགས].   

**Q:**  When you were there the first time, there was no war. How did the disturbances start? They told you that you were not allowed to go out, right?   

**A:**  Not long after I arrived in Ba, I went to the monastery at the end of the Losar. Our home was poor and we only fried a few cookies and the meat was rotten and I took the butter and made some tea. In general, butter was much scarcer in Ba than Litang. At that time, meat and butter were very scarce. Then after just several days, they said that revolt will take place in Ba. We didn't know that.   

**Q:**  One day, did they shoot at each other?   

**A:**  Later I was suspicious because the county government told us that the revolt will take place, so all the cadres must be careful. The house where we were staying used to be the house of the Ba Dewa, the king of Ba who was killed by the Manchu. This house was very big and was where the GMD military officers and the soldiers stayed. At that time, the county committee and the county government were all in that house. There were not many people in these two work units. Before that, they had prepared the Work Teams to go to the chu, but they gathered all the cadres in that house and told the Work Teams not to go to the chu. I was a cadre and also in the PLA, but they didn't send me the messages, so I was left at home. After several days, the disturbance took place in the Ba monastery and they yelled [Tib. སྐད་རྒྱག] and they surrounded the county committee and fired guns and blocked the water supply in Ba. Near the county committee, there was a big house belonging to the dzongpön of Ba called Jiang Khangshi which was lent to the school and was not confiscated. And Jiang Khangshi was in Dartsedo. All the schoolteachers and some cadres were staying in that house. Then the higher ups gave the order and told them [the cadres in the Jiang Khangshi's house] to come over to the county committee, but they couldn't enter because the door was blocked. On their way, about 7 people were killed and one of them was Tashi Tsering's father-in-law who was a teacher of the primary school. Therefore this killing of 7 people became the main crime that the Khambas committed in the revolt. If they had stayed, there wouldn't have been any danger, but when they were brought over, they were killed on their way. I heard that the reason the trouble took place was the killing of the 7 people. Then there was the Ba Lakha Lama. I first heard the "Army to Defend Buddhism" [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་སྲུང་དམག] at that time. At that time, I didn't dare to go out and was staying in my house. So I had trouble from two sides: the rebels were opposing the CCP, so there was danger because I was a cadre; later, the government also asked me, "what did you do with the rebels?" At that time, I wanted to watch them from the window. They had a yellow cloth [banner] but I could not see the letters [on it]. I first heard about the "Army to Defend Buddhism" in Ba around March 1956. There was no Chushigandru then. Because they [Chinese] destroyed the monastery, they [the Khambas] were saying "We are the Army to Defend Buddhism." So the revolt in Litang and in Ba took place almost at the same time. When I was in Litang, they said that the revolt took place in Ba. When we arrived Ba after the Losar, the revolt hadn't taken place and later I also asked the leaders and they said that the revolt hadn't taken place.   

**Q:**  In the books it is written that first the revolt took place in Setha, then Litang, and then Batang.   

**A:**  In Litang, something strange happened and later I was suspicious. They blocked the water in Ba and killed 7 people. It was said 7 people, but I am not sure about that. What I know is that two people called Xie Golung and Yi Qianling were killed, both teachers. If they had stayed in their house, they [the Khambas] would not have dared enter the house and they didn't have the courage to do that.   

**Q:**  Were most of the "Army to Defend Buddhism" from the Chöde Monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, but Bakor Lama was not a monk in the Chöde Monastery. He was from a small monastery called Druwa [Tib. སྒྲུབ་པ] Monastery.   

**Q:**  The monks from Druwa Monastery were not in the "Army to Defend the Buddhism', right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The monks from Chöde Monastery were in the "Army to Defend Buddhism, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Are Bakor Lama and Lakha Lama are same?   

**A:**  No. Bakor Lama is from a small monastery called Druwa Monastery and Lakha Lama was the lama of Chöde Monastery. He was in Drepung and now he is in Denmark. I heard now he passed away.   

**Q:**  Did you see them bombing the monastery in Ba?   

**A:**  I was staying in the house and didn't dare to go out, but I heard the gunshots when they blocked the water and I heard about the 7 people from people who were allowed to go back and forth. At that time, there were no newspapers. And then the soldiers came. It was as same as Litang and they [Khambas] fled right away.   

**Q:**  Did they [Khambas] go into the monastery? In Litang, when the soldiers came, the monks and the nomads went to the monastery.   

**A:**  Yes, that was where Yönrupön was killed.   

**Q:**  And then they fired cannons and machine guns and fought a lot of battles. And after awhile, the plane came and threw a bomb outside the monastery. The Litang people said the Chinese said "today we are going to give you a signal [Tib. བརྡ] and you must surrender. If you don't surrender, tomorrow, we will bomb inside the monastery".   

**A:**  I don't know about this. Anyway, a strange thing happened in Ba. They blocked the water in Ba and set a fire, but [actually] they couldn't block the water because there were many sources of water.   

**Q:**  Where did they set a fire?   

**A:**  They came to set fire near the gate of the county committee, but they couldn't because they were shot. Then probably after a month, the soldiers of the Fourth Regiment of the Public Security came.   

**Q:**  Was that the one who came to Litang?   

**A:**  No, the one who came to Litang stayed in Litang.   

**Q:**  After they came to Litang, then they came to Batang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The one who came to Litang stayed in Litang and another one came to Batang. As soon as the soldiers came, they fled to the mountains and the Chöde Monastery became empty. I remember clearly because I saw it when I went to walk with my younger brother. Then I saw the plane come and bomb the monastery. The reason why the masses were suspicious and lost their faith [Tib. དད་ལོག་སྐྱེད] was because they bombed the monastery when it was empty of people. Then the PLA came and renovated the monastery and I became the main eyewitness. At that time, all of the Army to Defend Buddhism had already fled. And I was the one who saw it. I kept quiet for many years, but later when they were telling many lies and the policy became loose, I said that. There was not even a single person in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Weren't there a few old monks [Tib. བླ་རྒན]?   

**A:**  Probably, 1-2 largen might have been there. My maternal uncle was from the countryside and he went to the countryside. On that day, the weather was very nice and there was the church and the garden of the Christians, but no one was taking care of it and this was the best garden in Ba. Then when my younger brother and I were going for a walk, the plane came.   

**Q:**  How many planes were there?   

**A:**  There were about 3-4 planes and they really bombed the monastery. And Litang Monastery was also bombed inside the monastery, not outside. I also saw that they had destroyed the assembly hall [Tib. འདུ་ཁང] and all of the houses.   

**Q:**  Were you there when they destroyed Litang Monastery?   

**A:**  No, when I returned to Litang, I saw that Litang Monastery had been already destroyed. Before it was destroyed, I went to buy meat and butter and later I heard that Yönrupön's body was [shot and looked] like a beehive.   

