# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.02 : Tape 2   
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 55  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He later became an important translator and more recently a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In this interview, he talks about the early history of the Tibet Work Committee in Lhasa in the 1950s and the disagreement between Fan Ming and Zhang Guohua. He discusses the idea of Front Tibet and Back Tibet, how Fan Ming put forward the plan to set up two autonomous regions and his plan to start land reforms in Tibet. He also discusses how Fan Ming was accused as a counter-revolutionary in 1958 and was the subject of struggle sessions. He describes Li Jingquan's policy for reforms in Kham (Sichuan-Xizang), how the revolt in Kham started, and then how Mao sent Liu Geping from Beijing to investigate. Finally, he talks about the People's Liberation Army bombing the three monasteries of Litang, Chantreng and Ba Chödegön. [NOTE" TT: refers to the interviewer Tashi Tsering]   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_02/H_0060_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  The 8th Party Congress was yet to be held [Tib. ཏང་གི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་བརྒྱད་པ], so he was called the General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་པོ] of the CCP, the position no longer exists. Deng Xiaoping was in the southwest. So Chairman Mao called Deng Xiaoping to Beijing and called Chen Yi from Shanghai [to Beijing]. At that time, Gao Gang was destroyed because he was said to be in the Anti-Party Group [Tib. དང་ལ་ངོ་རྒོལ་བྱེད་པའི་ཚོགས་པ]. Chen Yi was the Vice Premier of the State Council Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང; Ch. zong li; Tib. གཞོན་པ], the assistant of Premier Zhou. They had both gone to school in France. So they had a close personal relationship. He was in charge of the nationality affairs and since Tibet belonged to the southwest, Deng Xiaoping was leading Tibet directly. At this time, Tibetan issues were openly settled by Li Weihan. If he couldn't settle it, it was done by Chen Yi. And if he couldn't, then it was by Deng Xiaoping. And if he couldn't, then by Liu Shaoqi. According to the document that I saw, Tibetan issues did not reach Chairman Mao. The meeting was mainly held by Liu Shaoqi.   

**Q:**  Was that the biggest matter, saying that the Dalai Lama is higher?   

**A:**  This was not the matter. The main thing was the internal disagreement. Fan Ming didn't listen to Zhang Guohua and Zhang Guohua didn't listen to Fan Ming. When they appointed the people in the prefecture [Tib. ཞུཨན་ཆུ] and the Military Headquarters, Fan Ming was saying that the people from the northwest should be appointed and Zhang Guohua was saying his people should be appointed.   

**Q:**  TT: It was a matter of the factions, right?   

**A:**  It was mainly for their own private benefit. It was not the case that they were concerned about the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. The two lamas were just their tools. For example, I heard that Fan Ming said, "Zhang Guohua should take care of the matters related to war in the Military Headquarters." And Fan Ming, being the Vice Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji Tib. གཞོན་པ] of the Tibet Work Committee [Ch. gong wei; Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང], he said that he would take care of the Work Committee. In the past, the military was powerful. But in the civil matters, Zhang Guohua would have no work. So this meant that Fan Ming would do all the work and he would have all the power. I heard that Zhang Jingwu was sent by Mao by sea to Tibet. He met the Dalai Lama in Yadong. At this time, Mao told Zhang Jingwu that this would be a three month trip and he should bring the Dalai Lama to Lhasa. And when the soldiers of the southwest and the northwest arrived in Lhasa, then he should return to Beijing. Zhang Jingwu was the director of Chairman Mao's main office [Tib. གཞུང་ལས་ཁང; Ch. zhu ren]. He had his job in Beijing. At this time, Zhang Guohua was the Party Secretary and Fan Ming was the Vice Party Secretary. Fan Ming was very eloquent and he didn't need a draft for giving speeches. Zhang Guohua was a soldier and his speech was short and precise. We would say that Fan Ming was educated and literate, and that he was very verbal. Zhang Guohua acted like a military officer in his demeanor. Fan Ming was intelligent and I heard that he used to work in the Guomindang Regiment as a secret agent of the CCP. For example, when he gave lectures, he would be very casual and would have one hand in his pocket. So the soldiers didn't like him. In the Regiment, when Fan Ming spoke, the solders didn't like this. The intellectuals liked him. He would speak in a way that highlighted his knowledge and learning. And his Chinese calligraphy was the best in Tibet. So in Tibet, for the past 40 years, Fan Ming was the best in Chinese writing and poetics, and Hu Jingtao and those people couldn't compete with him.   

**Q:**  So, was the argument mainly on the power and on the matter of implementing democratic reforms?   

**A:**  It could have been those matters. I heard that there were those matters. There was the matter of power and there was also the matter of appraisal [Tib. གདེང་འཇོག], like appraising the Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama and Ngabö et cetera on who was doing better.   

**Q:**  Was it an appraisal for who was doing better work?   

**A:**  It was like an appraisal towards the Kashag, for example, which kalön was working better. I heard that there were arguments over these things. At that time, I didn't know about that. Later, I found this out when I read some documents. One main point was the matter of power. Basically on everything. E.g., there are four kalön in the Kashag and if some say that Ngabö is good and Surkhang is bad. If Zhang Guohua says that Ngabö is good, Che Jigme says Ngabö is tricky and has relations with the reactionaries, and so and so is working sincerely. The way of seeing things differently still exists even now.   

**Q:**  This we have everywhere, even in foreign countries.   

**A:**  So because these two were not friendly when they were the Party Secretaries, Mao told Zhang Jingwu to stay in Tibet as the Party Secretary and Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming were appointed as the Vice Party Secretaries. Then, Tan Guansan was also the Vice Party Secretary. Tibet is a small place and has a small number of Party members. This was the only place where there were one Party Secretary and three Vice Secretariers among the 20 odd provinces. Even Sichuan Province only had one Party Secretary and one vice. According to the system of the Communists, the political commissar [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན] should be a Party Secretary. Tan Guansan was the political commissar. Normally this would be the Party Secretary. Tan Guansan wasn't capable with work and was weak, He had been wounded, and had trouble remembering things. So they made him the vice and made Zhang Jingwu the Senior Party Secretary. Fan Ming looked down on Tan Guansan. Zhang Jingwu was told to stay in Lhasa. When they argued, Tan Guansan didn't have anything to say, but he was old and nice.   

**Q:**  The internal trouble started from the beginning, right?   

**A:**  When they left from here, they had the trouble. Fan Ming was young and knowledgeable and had strong backing from Peng Dehuai and Xi Zhongxun (he is now People's Congress Vice Chairman [Ch. wei yuan zhang; Tib. གཞོན་པ]).   

**Q:**  According to what I read in a book, in the beginning, it was planned that the soldiers of the Northwest were to liberate [Tibet], but at this time Peng Dehuai sent a letter to Mao Zedong saying that it was very hard for them to liberate [Tibet] because the road was bad. So it would be good if the Southwest liberated it. Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that.   

**Q:**  So at that time, the Northwest gave the power to the Southwest, right?   

**A:**  Deng Xiaoping and Peng Dehuai didn't need to argue. They were saying that it was hard to go through the northwest and people had been going through from Kham to Tibet [Tib. ཁམས་བོད] -- from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> to Lhasa. When Fan Ming and Zhang Guohua fought, as long as they didn't go against the rules of the party, it was not a serious mistake. If Fan Ming said that "I regard the CCP and Chairman Mao, but I am fighting with Zhang Guohua," there would be nothing. Usually, Zhang Guohua was powerful and being the Vice Party Secretary, he could have demoted Fan Ming. If he reported to Peng Dehuai and said that he was going to demote Fan Ming, and if Peng Dehuai said that he [Fan Ming] was a good comrade, then it was finished. Zhang Guohua was not that brave and at this time, Peng Dehuai was the Commander-in-Chief and had more power and a higher rank than Deng Xiaoping in terms of military affairs. According to my point of view, Peng Dehuai was not seizing the power from Deng Xiaoping because they didn't need to do that. It was like if the two of us were fighting, but we were not fighting the government.   

**Q:**  When there is trouble, they would report to the higher ups, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when we reported to the higher ups, they would back my people.   

**Q:**  How would they settle it? Would they hold meetings?   

**Q:**  Actually, we, the communists, would hold meetins and do critiques and self-critiques. But, according to my point of view, the problem is not solved even now.   

**Q:**  Do you mean in Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the people from both sides?   

**A:**  Yes, there are the people and also the influence. As I told you, in 1985, at the 20th anniversary of the Tibet Autonomous Region, Wu Jinghua was the head. At this time, Fan Ming was invited. He said a lot about how the accomplishment for liberating Tibet came from the Northwest Bureau. So this is a sign that the dispute is still active. Then in 1991, Wu Jinghua went to inland China and Hu Qingtao was appointed [He is now #6 in China.] as the head in Tibet. Hu Qingtao had no experience in Tibet, so Ying Fatang [of the Southwest group] and those people came to Tibet and told Hu Qingtao all the accomplishments that they did in past. As for the people who didn't know the situation then, it seems that they were talking about the accomplishments of the CCP. But, internally, they were talking about their own accomplishments.   

**Q:**  Was Ying Fatang from the Northwest [group]?   

**A:**  He was from the Southwest. He was part of the soldiers of Zhang Guohua. Some of the comments are really not true. The northern road was made by Fan Ming and Mo Shenzhong and the southern route was made by the Southwest Army. But in the movie, they only showed the Kham-Tibet highway. They showed nothing about the northern road. They worked very hard. The best accomplishment was the Qinghai highway because the road is better and 90 percent of supplies come over it. That is not the case. The Khambas were incapable, but the Southwest Army had to overcome many difficult mountains. However, in the movies, they only showed how Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan crossed and how we made war in the Tangma la Mountain Pass. Mo Shenzhong only last year appeared on TV for a short time and there wasn't any photo of Fan Ming. I think this is not fair and I am also writing about this.   

**Q:**  Actually, it was the Southwest who liberated [Tibet], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the Northwest Army fight?   

**A:**  No, but it brought back the Panchen Lama. Therefore Fan Ming and the Panchen Lama were close. So since the Dalai Lama fled to India, he was a reactionary and the Panchen Lama was a progressive [Tib. ཡར་ཐོན་པ]. So if the Panchen Lama hadn't died, Fan Ming would have had a good relationship. This year, in the 3rd month, the Political Consultative Conference had a meeting and Fan Ming was not among the committee members [Ch. wei yuan]. And Ying Fatang was a delegate of the National People's Congress. Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན] was a leader in the Political Consultative Conference. Going by age, all are in their 70s, but Fan Ming is retired, but the others haven't retired. So things aren't fair. Ying Fatang and Dorje Tseden are over 70 so they should really be retired, but they said that they need them specially to work on Tibet. And Peng Dehuai's associate Xi Zhongxun is the Vice Chairman of the National People's Congress and is ill. So since he is sick and not able to be involved - And there are not many people from the Northwest among the committee members and Deng Xiaoping is there, Fan Ming didn't get anything.   

**Q:**  TT: I heard he was crazy?   

**A:**  Not crazy, sick. So all the former committee members from the Northwest Army are no longer there.   

**Q:**  Actually, Deng Xiaoping knows all the matters of Tibet, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but nowadays, I think he is not that attentive of Tibet because the construction in Tibet is very complicated because of the Russians, and the Tibet issue would be a small one for them among the one point two billion people. When people look from outside, the Tibet issue seems to be a big one, but for the country, it was a small matter.   

**A:**  TT: The population of Tibet is not even like a big city in China.   

**A:**  It seems that you know the leaders of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a>. Did the Nangmagang really say it wants reforms early? And why did they say that?   

**A:**  Yes, they thought of becoming progressive [Tib. སྔོན་ཐོན] and to show the CCP that they were patriotic and the Kashag was reactionary. They said they wanted to do reforms first.   

**Q:**  Do you think that this was their real thought? Or did Fan Ming and those people tell them that it would be good to say that? Why did they want this since they were Kudrak?   

**A:**  I think that Fan Ming probably put forward the plan [Tib. ཇུས་བཏོན] for them to say this. They also wanted to establish two autonomous regions; one here [Lhasa] and one there [Tsang].   

**Q:**  When did they put forward this idea?   

**A:**  This was suggested in 1952. At that time, the Chinese called it "Front Tibet" or Chentsang [Ch. qian zang] for central Tibet and "Back Tibet" or Houtsang [Ch. hou zang] for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>. Ü is front and Tsang is back. At this time, Chairman Mao, Premier Zhou, and Li Weihan probably didn't know about this in detail because they hadn't been to Tibet. They were being told, "There are the sun and the moon in the sky and there are the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama on the Earth [Tib. གནམ་ལ་ཉི་མ་ཛ་བ། ས་ལ་རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས]." So these higher officials must have thought that half of Tibet was the Panchen Lama's and half was the Dalai Lama's. Because they never came to Tibet, they were probably thinking this. I think that Mao originally had probably said that the Southwest should go to Front Tibet and the Northwest to Back Tibet. So the Southwest soldiers met the Dalai Lama and came to Lhasa while the Northwest soldiers and Fan Ming met the Panchen Lama in Kumbum [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ] and came with him to Tibet. At that time, he was the Minister of the United Front Ministry [Tib. འཐབས་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར; Ch. bu zhang]. So the Panchen Lama had a close relationship with the Northwest. So the officials in Shigatse Prefecture were all Northwest army officials and it was said that it would be easy for them to work there. After they investigated the matter and came to Tibet, they realized that Tibet wasn't half-half and the Kashag had the overall power in Tibet and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> had only three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>; Lhatse [Tib. ལྷཙེ], Ngamring [Tib. ངམ་རིང], and Phuntsoling [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང], and 49 estates - only this. The Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] Refers to Shigatse dzong as well as the 2 heads of the Shigatse dzong while the Panchen Lama was in exile. After he returned in 1952, the 2 heads of Shigatse dzong were just called Dzongpön.">Jidzong</a> [Tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] had power over them. All the other areas were under the Kashag. Later the higher officials realized this. Then the Central Government specially sent Ya Hanzhang to Tibet to investigate these issues definitively - that is, how much authority the Dalai Lama had and how much the Panchen Lama had. Later his written history of this period came from this job.   

**Q:**  Was Ya Hanzhang a soldier?   

**A:**  Yes. From the Northwest.   

**Q:**  He has written a very good book in Tibetan, which I read.   

**Q:**  Actually, he wasn't a scholar and professor like you. He was an official [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་པོ] of the CCP, and the Vice Minister of the United Front Ministry. There were not many educated people among the Southwest. He was sent to study this and learned that way. So the Northwest had more educated people than the Southwest. Earlier, Ya Hanzhang was a Drepung monk sent by the CCP from Ya'an to study. This was before the liberation.   

**Q:**  TT: He was probably a spy?   

**Q:**  Not really a spy, but he was sent to be trained. I was a friend of his. He was our leader in the Academy of Social Science [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཚན་རིག་ཁང].   

**Q:**  TT: Is he still alive?   

**A:**  He has died. He didn't know Tibetan, but he had a lot of Tibetan people working under him, and he got a lot of reference materials and was given this duty. They took all the documents to China and he wrote the book with their help. Ya Hanzhang investigated the issue and approved, and Fan Ming also gave him the duty and he reported to Fan Ming that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama are same, they have no difference in position [Tib. གོ་ས]. Sometimes the Dalai Lama is the teacher and sometimes the Panchen Lama is the teacher, e.g. the 5th Dalai Lama's teacher was the 4th Panchen Lama who cut the tuft of his hair [Tib. སྐྲ་ཕུད] when he became a monk and he did prostration to the Panchen Lama et cetera. So there is no difference on the religious side. But for political power, it was held by the Dalai Lama and the Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> didn't have the power. On the religious side, they were like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a> and his two pupils [Tib. རྗེ་ཡབ་སྲས་གསུམ]. So Ya said, "China talking about front and back Tibet is not correct. All the soldiers on the border et cetera are from the Kashag, the government. The Panchen Lama's Nangmagang has no soldiers and has no government." This is what he reported. Fan Ming got angry at this and called Ya Hanzhang a traitor to China [Ch. han jian; Tib. ནང་རུལ་པ]. So Ya Hanzhang was nicknamed Traitor Ya, Yang Han jien [laughter].   

**Q:**  Was this in 1952?   

**A:**  This began in 1952, and in 1953 and '54 the dispute took place. Later, in 1955, the decision of whether he was a traitor or not took place. China had a meeting about this. Then Mao understood all and decided in accordance with his research. There were meetings in '53 and '54 but it was settled in '55. In 1958 he lost his rank along with Fan Ming. They were called Rightists and he was there when they held the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> against Fan Ming. When they held the struggle session against Fan Ming, Zhang Guohua didn't always stand on one side. Being a soldier, he was fair, and if something is wrong he says it is wrong. Later, he became the Vice Leader of the Academy of Social Science.   

**Q:**  Finally, in 1958, Fan Ming lost the competition, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Fan Ming and his people were called the counter-revolutionaries [Tib. གསར་བརྗེ་ངོ་རྒོལ་པ] and he was made to be reformed through labor [Tib. ངལ་རྩོལ་སྒྱུར་བཀོད] [forced to do labor to get him to change] and expelled from the Party.   

**Q:**  What was his special wrong doing?   

**A:**  There wasn't any special thing in 1957. It occurred when they were opposing the rightists all over the nation.   

**Q:**  TT: He was called the big rightist in Tibet, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were rightists everywhere.   

**Q:**  In 1956, they prepared for the reforms in Tibet, right?   

**A:**  This was done by Fan Ming.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, probably, Mao Zedong said many times that we must do things slowly.   

**A:**  It was not exactly like this. Chairman Mao had probably said that we should do it slowly, but in 1955 and '56, in China, there was a movement called the "Socialist Transformation [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱི་སྒྱུར་བཀོད]" all over China. I was studying in Chengdu in 1956. This movement started at this time. There were two main issues. One, the agricultural cooperatives [Tib. ཞིང་ལས་མཉམ་ལས]. This was the high level cooperatives before starting the communes in 1958. Two, to buy out [Tib. བླུ་ཉོ] all the private capitalist enterprises. This was called the socialist reform. Before the agricultural cooperatives, there was the Mutual Aid Teams. At this time (1956), the propaganda in the newspapers daily was that Socialism has arrived. The paper said that what took Russia 30 years they would change in one year [laughter]. So at this time, Fan Ming said we too should start socialism here.   

**Q:**  Where were Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua?   

**A:**  Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were both in Beijing and that coincided with when they came for thir vacation. No. In the beginning Zhang Jingwu was in Tibet. At that time, I was in Beijing. Zhang Jingwu was very smart and he thought that it would not be good if they insulted him, and he came to China saying "I am ill," and returned to Beijing. He asked for permission to return to Beijing. I was in Beijing in 1956. Zhang Guohua was our leader. Though he didn't know me, but he would come to see us. I think that since there were political problems in Tibet, Zhang Guohua, being a politician, went to Beijing [laughs]. At that time, the revolt had also started in Kham and it - and Hungary and Poland also had uprisings - and the Dalai Lama went to India. So China convened a meeting about Tibet, and said that we should be a little bit loose, and this proved that what Fan Ming did was wrong. After this, Zhang Guohua returned to Lhasa. Zhang Guohua arrived back in Lhasa just as the Dalai Lama was about to go to India. So Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were called "rightists" by Fan Ming. At this time, in China, there was a campaign against rightists.   

**Q:**  What was the goal for implementing the reforms in Khams?   

**A:**  I don't know what the goal was. It started at the end of 1955. Before this, Kham was called Xikang Province, which was later disbanded. At the beginning of 1955, it became part of Sichuan Province and the cooperatives started in Sichuan.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Sichuan under the Southwest Bureau or what?   

**A:**  Yes, in 1954, there was a decision to eliminate the Southwest Bureau and others. There was a little bit [of cooperatives] in 1955. In 1960, however, they made them again. It was done because we had a famine in 1960 and Liu Jingquan became the first Party Secretary. It was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  At that time, who were the biggest leaders of Sichuan?   

**A:**  Li Jingquan.   

**Q:**  Was he from the military?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the Political Commissar of the military and he was very powerful.   

**Q:**  When they implemented the reforms, did they think that the Khambas would cause trouble?   

**A:**  Probably not. At that time, when I was at the Southwest Nationality Institute, it was said that Li Jingquan, on implementing the cooperative farming reforms, had gone too fast and was too excessive. At that time, nationwide, the landlords were destroyed and their land were divided. In 1955, in Sichuan, Li Jingquan started cooperatives in the Chinese areas. Then there were minority nationalities like the Yi. There was a serfdom system [Tib. བྲན་གཡོག་ལམ་ལུགས] in their area where the serfs were chained at night to prevent them escaping and they made them do labor in the daytime. Some were even put under large cauldrons to prevent them fleeing.   

**A:**  Do you mean the cauldrons used in the monasteries in Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, but broken ones. At this time, Li Jingquan said we had to do the reforms in 1955. I also thought this was a good thing and not bad. At that time, when I was told to be a teacher, they said that they did the reforms and started the cooperatives. Li Jingquan was saying, "We should reach the sky with a single bound [Ch. yi bu deng tian; Tib. གོམ་པ་གང་གིས, གནམ་ལ་སླེབས་པ་བྱེད་པ]." This idea wasn't Zhongyang's policy but was Li Jingquan's plan. He also said, "Tibet has the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མངའ་བདག; ch. 领主] Feudal lord, manorial estate holders, serf-owners.">ngadag</a> (feudal landlords), estates and serfs. And the serfs don't have private lands for themselves, and the Yi nationality also doesn't have private lands. In China, it took five years to eliminate the landlords and to redivide the fields. But in Tibet and the Yi nationality areas, we have to reach the sky with one great leap. His idea was to confiscate the fields of the landlords and go right into the cooperatives without doing the mutual aid work (phase). He was not bad. He was just a revolutionary. He said that, "Yi people have loyalty to the revolution and the CCP, but after we dividd up the lands of the landlords, the people will not know how to farm by themselves. So a cooperative is necessary. Like Russia, we will establish collective farms [Tib. ཇི་ཏི་ནོང་ཆང]. This will allow us to increase agricultural production and move ahead." The second idea was the "direct transition [Tib. ཐད་ཀའི་བར་བརྒལ; Ch. zhijie guodu]", which was like crossing the river directly. And we didn't need to teach the Yi and Tibetan languages. In the future, when we went [transitioned] to communism, the language would be unified and all in China will speak Chinese. We don't need to know Tibetan writing or speaking. If all learn Chinese, it is okay. When we go to communism, there will be no difference between the countries in the world and there will be no classes. This was Li Jingquan's idea, and they even taught us this.   

**Q:**  This was different from the idea of the Central Government, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, the Central Government didn't pay much attention because they couldn't follow all the events nationwide. It was the policy of two provinces [Tibet and Sichuan], they were not attentive. At this time, there was the eight letter policy to do things [Tib. ཡིག་འབྲུ་བརྒད་ཀྱི་བྱེད་ཕྱོགས]; the first four were to reach the sky with one step and the second was the direct transition. This was too fast and there weren't enough cadres. Li's plan was to build a Nationality Hotel [Tib. མི་རིགས་སྣེ་ལེན་ཁང] (hotel) in 1955. This would be the place where the Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> would stay. It was not like a hotel but [like an apartment] where one family would have a toilet, kitchen, and several rooms. At that time, the house [apartment building] was very good and even the cadres of the CCP didn't that kind of a house. We were to buy-out the high ranking kudrak and put them there there and give them positions and titles in the Political Consultative Conference. And then we would send several thousand students of the Southwest Nationality Institute like us and soldiers to Tibet, and do the revolution and make the serfs rise up. And we should be the leaders. I was 15 years old and many students were sent. They called them [the kudrak] and their wives and children. That house is still there.   

**Q:**  Were these for the Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>?   

**A:**  No, it was for Kham's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in Ganzi and the Ngapa [Tib. རྔ་པ]. Liu would say, "You kudrak lived by virtue of agricultural serfdom [Tib. ཞིང་བྲན]. Now you get your livelihood from the state. In the past, you rode horses and now you ride cars given by China." This was 1955 when they held the People Congress and didn't let the chiefs go home.   

**Q:**  What did they do with them after they didn't let them go home?   

**A:**  Then they were saying that the Chinese duped them. The Chinese were supposed to be good to them, but then they [the chiefs] sent their servants with the message saying do not hand over our weapons to the Chinese and hide the gold and silver.   

**Q:**  Did they first collect the guns or first call them to the meeting?   

**A:**  First, they held the meeting. Then they passed the resolution to implement the reforms and they also raised their hands [laughter]. This resolution was published in the newspaper in 1955. I was a poor person so I welcomed the announcement of the resolution. I will find the paper and give you a copy. Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོས་སྟོབས་ལྡན] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] were at this meeting. And the various dzongpön. All of them gave speeches saying that they agreed to do the reforms and the reform was good.   

**Q:**  Did they say that the democratic reforms were good?   

**A:**  They raised their hands and said they agreed to the reforms. It was like what Chairman Mao said," In the daytime they raise their hands and at night they cry [Tib. ཉིན་མའི་གུང་ལ་ལག་པ་བཏང, མཚན་ནག་གུང་ལ་མིག་ཆུ་བཏང] [laughter]. This was a saying of Chairman Mao about the great landlords of Shanghai when they implemented the reform in China and not in Kham.   

**Q:**  Did they really agree with the reforms?   

**A:**  They said yes. I don't know what they really thought. Jayan Pemo was at that meeting. Then they made the agreement, and then the Work Teams were sent to the different areas.   

**Q:**  Why weren't they allowed to return to their homes?   

**A:**  We knew that they were going to oppose it and they would not get away from being under the political stages. But the buy-out policy was implemented. So Li said, "The CCP is going to liberate the poor people and we will take care of your livelihoods. Do not exploit them and Zhongyang will also give you money for your property that we will take. Your livelihood will improve from before, not get worse. We will give you a house and car. I am obliged to pay you a salary because I am the leader of the province." But the Khambas said they destroyed our religion and our culture. When they sent people to the monasteries to collect guns, all the monasteries had guns. They said they didn't have guns and they closed the monasteries' gates. In some monasteries, the Work Team was sent, which at this time was called the Armed Work Team [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་ལས་དོན་རུ་ཁག; Ch. wu gong dui]. This was because they carried weapons. The monks said, "Why do you come here to make democratic reforms carrying guns when you are not letting us carry guns? Our weapons are not to fight with the Communist Party. For many generations, these have belonged to the monastery.   

**Q:**  The house where they were kept was built in Sichuan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, They were kept in Chengdu. For example, the Derge Queen also stayed in Chengdu. But her son returned to Derge and he told the other Khambas "You should not listen to the Chinese and turn in your guns. But you should oppose the Chinese." Mao said this work was too fast. So China sent a Zhongyang Work Team to Sichuan to investigate Li Jingquan in 1956. The head of this was Liu Geping. He put out a 12 point statement. He said that what Li Jingquan did was too excessive. "It is not in accordance with Mao's advice or the Zhongyang's ideas and you have not reported to the Central Committee about what you did." He told the lamas and the chiefs, "I'm sorry. What we did was wrong." I don't remember these 12 points nor did Liu Geping himself. It is only in a secret document not distributed. Liu Geping is in Lanzhou in his 80s and can say all kinds of things. The resolution has been published but not the investigation. Then Chairman Mao said, "We will postpone reforms for six years." This was done by summarizing the experiences and Chairman Mao made the decision.   

**Q:**  Was this Kham or only Tibet, Bö?   

**A:**  This was for Bö, not Kham. In Kham they had to just go ahead. But Mao said, "We don't have any choice but to implement the reform because in Kham, they revolted. But, we made errors [Tib. སྐྱོན]. Firstly, we hadn't made adequate preparations. Second, we didn't train the revolutionary cadres adequately. We taught them too little. We didn't have enough cadres trained by the CCP." So we sent soldiers and they used force to suppress the people. Mao used this experience to reflect on Tibet and gave the six-year postponement during which preparations could be made well.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were in Batang, right?   

**A:**  In 1956, when I went for a vacation, they decided to call me to Beijing. At the time of the meeting when the resolution was passed, I was in Chengdu. I was neither with a delegation nor an interpreter, but I translated some documents and went by horse with the Work Team. I was glad to go for implementing the democratic reforms. When we arrived there, some of the monasteries closed their gates.   

**A:**  Was those the monasteries where the Work Team was supposed to go?   

**A:**  No. We went everywhere, but the other people were scattered. The main target for us was the monastery since they were the most powerful. At this time, there was no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, but the Khambas called themselves the Sangye Tensungmag OR "The Army to Defend Religion [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་སྲུང་དམག]. In Lhasa, in the house called Nepalese House, there was a lama called Bagu Lama. He was a committee member on the Political Consultative Conference. He was the head leader [Tib. འགོ་ལྟེ་བ] of the Sangye Tensungmag. I was on the Work Team at the time.   

**A:**  What did you tell them when you went to the monasteries?   

**A:**  I don't know because I was on vacation and not the interpreter. I went with the Work Team because there wasn't a motorable road. The three monasteries' monks blocked us from entering the two monasteries, Litang Monastery and Ba Chöde [Tib. འབའ་ཆོས་སྡེ] Monastery, saying that the Work Team was not allowed to enter the monasteries. In some monasteries when the Work Team came, the monks fired on them and killed some. As a result of this, it was said that a revolt occurred. So I think that it was as a result of these events that the uprisings occurred, not as a result of any plans in advance like you Americans [make]. They just fired a gun from this side and then the other side fired a gun. The revolt arose from these three, Ba Chöde Monastery, Litang Monastery, and Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང] Monastery. Trijang Rimpoche's homeland was Chantreng. Liu Geping was saying that Li didn't do adequate preparation and he didn't discuss and work in detail. So the rebellion started and in 1959, the Dalai Lama went to India. And Li Jingquan later accused Liu Geping, saying that, "You did wrong and you apologized to the kudraks, but now see, Trijang incited a revolt in Chantreng. You are a rightist". In 1960, Liu Geping was recalled from Ningsha [near Lanzhou] and they held struggle sessions against him and demoted him.   

**Q:**  Was there fighting in Ba?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a lot. When the fighting began, I was on vacation in Ba from Chengdu. I was hiding in my family's house at the time since I wasn't a cadre in Ba. The revolt was started at the Ba Chöde Monastery. Bagu Lama's force was in the monastery and the cadres were in the County Government. Bagu Lama (from Drepung) started the Sangye Tensung Magar. There was a river. On the east side, there was a small summer palace of the Ba Laga Lama and the monastery was near the river. The rebels blocked the river flow and the county had no water, and they started shooting at the county [the Chinese in the dzong] and vice versa. They stopped them that way for a long time. Then from Chengdu the People's Liberation Army sent soldiers and they defeated the rebels who fled. The People's Liberation Army came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> and Minyag. They (the rebels) fled to the Tibet side of the Yangtze River to Chamdo and Lhasa. The Baba were the first who crossed the Yangtze River.   

**Q:**  What month was this?   

**A:**  This was probably in the 6th month as it was hot then [in 1956]. When I went home on vacation, I went with the Work Team. When I returned to Chengdu, I came with the People's Liberation Army troops. My vacation ended up lasting six months because of the rebellion. I sent a telegram asking for an extension of my leave due to the rebellion. So after the rebels fled, then a plane came and dropped bombs and destroyed the Ba Chöde Monastery and Litang Monastery. This was not needed. After the plane dropped the bomb, the rebels returned as they thought the plane was from Taiwan. Then when they found out it was a communist plane, they fled again.   

**Q:**  Was Taiwan helping?   

**A:**  No. There was no way to make a connection. It was an empty hope that Taiwan would assist them. Bagu Lama came from Chongqing.   

**Q:**  So Bagu Lama can say a lot of things, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Ask Bagu Lama, he knows all. There was a song in Ba then: "In the happy place of Ba we have double crops in summer. The monastery where religion is flourishing is surrounded by juniper trees [Tib. འབའ་འདི་སྐྱིད་པའི་ཐོག་ལ། དབྱར་གྱི་སྟོན་ཐོག་ཉིས་བརྩེགས། དགོན་པ་ཆོས་ས་དར་ས། ཤུག་པས་གཡས་སྐོར་བཏང་ཡོད]." It was said that Ba Monastery and Reting had the most juniper trees. After the bombs destroyed the monastery, they changed the last sentence "surrounded by junipers" into "surrounded by bombs [Ch. zha dan; Tib. གཡས་སྐོར་བཏང་སོང]."   

**Q:**  How many monks and Tensung Magar were there fighting then?   

**A:**  About 1,000 in all. As for the monasteries that revolted there were; Targye Gomba Monastery, Ganzi Monastery, Chantreng Monastery, Chödegön Monastery, and Ba Litang Monastery. The Sangye Tensungmag were mainly monks from these five, [but they were each separate]. These five had several thousand monks. I don't think there were people who wanted to protect the old system. If Jagö Tomden had said that he wanted to protect the old society and if we did the democratic reforms, the people wouldn't support them - I myself liked the reforms very much. But if the monks rose up, then there were more and the masses supported them. As to monks, they were easy to get to rise if the abbots incited them. The masses were hard to get to rise since they were scattered. My opinion is that the monks rose up first. They rose not to oppose reforms, but rather to protect religion. For example, in my household, when my mother and relatives heard about democratic reforms they liked it, but when the monastery was destroyed they said, "That's too bad. Oh my Lord Buddha [Tib. ཨཀ་ཨཀ་ཇོ་བོ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ]." At this time, when they destroyed the monastery, the Work Team then divided the monastery's barley that had been kept in storage and also gave salt and tea to the poor people. But the poor didn't dare take the things since they belonged to the monastery. The revolt was long and my household had no tea for six months. So I told my relatives to go and get tea from the monastery since we hadn't had it for a long time. I sent one relative to get it. He came back with the tea and my mother was so angry and she scolded us saying that if they did that, we would have to bear the karmic consequences and she sent back the tea. So later, the barley and the tea of the monastery were eaten by birds. I was a cadre, so I couldn't go and get the tea myself. Dorje Tseden's wife is named Drokar [Tib. སྒྲོལ་དཀར]. Her family was rich and when they divided up her family's confiscated things, the people were eager to get the things and fought over them. But they wouldn't take the monastery's possessions. We were cadres and we opposed the revolt, but when they destroyed the monastery, I felt sad and had a feeling of coldness. This is the truth.   

