# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0060.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 55  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jambey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a young boy from Batang who joined the People's Liberation Army's Dance Troupe and came to Tibet with them in 1951. He later became an important translator and more recently a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. In this interview, he talks about his experiences in the army and in Lhasa where he attended the Cadre School and did some low level translating for the People's Liberation Army. He discusses how in 1954 he went to Chengdu to attend the Nationality School and participated in important events in Sichuan in 1955 when the Dalai Lama returned through there to Tibet. Additionally, he talks about how Li Jingquan pushed through approval for starting democratic reforms in Ganzi [Kham], the subsequent Khamba uprising, and the investigative team sent from Beijing headed by Liu Geping.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0060_01/H_0060_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me how you joined the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> in Batang.   

**Q:**  I went to the Chinese school in Batang. There were two kinds of schools in Batang. One was set up by the Americans which was called Religious Association School [Ch. jiao hui xue; Tib. ཆོས་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ].   

**Q:**  Was that Christian?   

**A:**  Batang was also like Hong Kong where the Americans had invaded and it was leased to them for 99 years and became the concession [Ch. zu jie; Tib. བཙན་གཡར་ས་ཆ] - a tract of land supposed to be leased, but actually seized by an imperialist. But when I tell people, they do not believe me and they say it is impossible to have that in Ba [Tib. འབའ]. There was also the Religious Association Hospital.   

**Q:**  Did they lease the land to the Christians or the government?   

**A:**  I heard that it was leased to the government, but the office was held by the Religious Association. In 1950, when the place was liberated, two Americans were expelled [from the area] by Bapa Phüntso Wangye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ]. I saw them with my own eyes.   

**Q:**  It seems to me that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> made relations with the Christians.   

**A:**  No, this was before the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> and at the end of the Manchu era. So I went to the GMD school. My going to school was a tax, like the monk's tax [Tib. གྲྭ་ཁྲལ]. One had to go. If you had two kids, one had to be made a monk and the other had to go to school.   

**Q:**  Who was the leader of Batang?   

**A:**  This was during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> reign. This area had become Chinese territory or gyade [Tib. རྒྱ་སྡེ]. I was among the students who went as a tax. There were about 10 students in the course. They taught Chinese language and speech.   

**Q:**  Was your household from the countryside?   

**A:**  My family was really from Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས], not Batang. My grandfather was a muleteer's assistant [Tib. ལག་དོ] and was very poor. I never saw him. Our family had a fight with someone else and we had to move to Batang. We only had a small house and were poor. I graduated from the primary school and learned written and spoken Chinese there.   

**Q:**  Was that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a>'s school?   

**A:**  Yes. And they taught the Chinese language and writing, and in 1950, Kham was liberated.   

**Q:**  I heard that before 1950 when the CCP took over Batang, Bapa Phüntso Wangye and they began a secret party, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I was a boy and was not in that. Before 1950, the CCP took over Batang. Between 1949 and 1950, Baba Phünwang, began a secret party called an underground party [Tib. ས་འོག་ཚོགས་པ]. So at the start of 1950, Bapa Phüntso Wangye, my older brother, and about 100 youths, went off with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>, and Phüntso Wangye was the leader. In 1950, the People's Liberation Army arrived in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>, which was called Xikang in the past. At this time, the People's Liberation Army closed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> school. So I had no school and at age 11, I returned home and we had a shortage of food. At this time, a letter arrived from my brother saying, If you join the PLA, it will be good because the PLA will treat the poor well. The PLA needed people because they had to go to Tibet and they needed interpreters. As far as politics is concerned, it was said that the PLA were not Chinese soldiers. If they said that they are Chinese soldiers, the Chinese and Tibetans were fighting. So they were saying that it was, a troop of all the nationalities of the PRC. We, the Tibetans were calling them Chinese soldiers [Ch. han bing] and red Chinese [Tib. རྒྱ་དམར], but the CCP was saying "We are not red Chinese, we are the PLA of the all the nationalities, like the Muslims and the Mongolians. The CCP is not the CCP of Chinese and it is the CCP of all the nationalities. When the People's Liberation Army first came to Tibet to liberate it, they had to have Tibetans since they needed people to translate. At this time, Phünwang was older. My older brother was 18 years old. He had graduated from the Middle school. There were about a little more than 10 children from the poor families. At this time, those who were rich, sent their sons to school in Dartsedo and Chengdu. My own household was poor so it was unable to pay to send me to school.   

**Q:**  Where did you have to go when you joined the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>?   

**A:**  There were different offices. Later, I did research and found that the People's Liberation Army sent 40,000-50,000 soldiers in the 18th Army Corps who came from the southwest and the northwest from Kham, Qinghai, and Xinjiang, all places. There were about 300 or 400 Tibetans with them in the People's Liberation Army. Among the Tibetans, Phünwang was the leader and at this time, Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན], Phüntra [Tib. ཕུན་བཀྲས], and ones like that were the ones who joined the revolution in 1949-50. I was among the youngest. I was 11.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were in Ba, where did you go to join the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> came to Ba. There was a regiment [Tib. མདའ་ཤོག] of the 18th Army Corps that had reached Batang-Litang.   

**Q:**  Did you wear a uniform?   

**A:**  Yes. Phünwang was with the leaders, like Zhang Guohua, and since I was a child, I was on the Propaganda Team [Tib. དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས་རུ་ཁག]. Our main mission was propagandizing the Common Program [Tib. སྤྱི་མཉམ་རྩ་ཚིག; Ch. gong thong gang ling] [this was the precursor to the constitution] which was made in 1949 when the CCP did the liberation. So in 1954 when the Dalai Lama went to China, this [Common Program] was made into the constitution. At this time, I didn't know the [written] Tibetan language and I didn't understand some of the terms. I also had to be the interpreter when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> went to buy food for the people and fodder for the horses. I had never carried a gun and made war.   

**Q:**  At that time, could you speak Chinese fluently?   

**A:**  I could speak the Sichaun dialect quite well because I studied at the Chinese <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> school in Ba. The school was set up by the Manchu government which was called Xuethang, and we had a photo of Confucius and the statue of the Christian Mariya. At that time, there were about 20-30 Tibetan children total in the regiment of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> who joined the revolution in 1950-51. In 1950-51, there were about 20-30 kids age 11 or so in the People's Liberation Army attack force. At this time, some like Yeshe Tenzin were writers.   

**Q:**  Were they all from Batang?   

**A:**  No. They were from all such as from over Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], Ganzi, and Dartsedo. There were only about four small children from Batang, one of whom died in the war over the revolt in Ngari. There [were] over 100 adults. I joined the army in 1950 and in 1951 when Ngabö came down and after the Chamdo war ended, our group went to Chamdo with the soldiers. I was about 12 then. I had been working making a motor road. It was the main road from Kham via the Tangmala [Tib. སྟག་མ་ལ] Pass.   

**Q:**  Was it the road in Tibet?   

**A:**  It was the main highway from Kham to Tibet. Our group of soldiers had three regiments and a little less than 10,000 people building the road. It was hard work. I wrote about this in my book in Tibetan titled Kelsang Metok [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་མེ་ཏོག], and there is also a Chinese version. Tangmala was between Derge and Chamdo after one crossed the Yangtse River and it was near Chamdo. It was between the Yangtse River and the Dzachu [Tib. རྫ་ཆུ] [River]. When Ngabö came down on his way to Beijing in 1951, I met him. I was selected to give him flowers because I was the smallest of the soldiers. This was in the 4th month of 1951. I was wearing a military uniform. Then when Ngabö returned from Beijing, he used this road. In the past, I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of Waring. Then I was sent to Chamdo with the dance troupe [Tib. ཟློས་གར་ཚོགས་པ] as a translator in the Tibet Military Area Command [Tib. བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང]. There were about 100 troops in the dance troupe, but only four were Tibetans. I was with Dorje Tseden's wife. This was before the Military Area Command reached Lhasa. Then I was sent to Lhasa. My regiment was sent to Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] to build roads.   

**Q:**  Whose dance troupe was that?   

**A:**  It was the Dance Troupe of the Tibet Military Area Command, which later moved to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  So the Tibet Military Area Command was set up before you came to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  At that time, the office was not set up, but the leaders were all there. The Commander [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི] was Zhang Guohua. The Political Commissar [Tib. chab srid uyön] was Tan Guansan. My previous regiment went to Powo to build the road and I went to Lhasa. In Lhasa, on the 26th of the 10th month [1951], the People's Liberation Army entered Lhasa and there was a ceremony [he refers to the arrival of Zhang Guohua's main 18th Army Corps]. I was there. Tibetan long horns were blown by our dance troupe.   

**Q:**  Before that, Wang Qimei came, right?   

**A:**  Before us, Wang Qimei and Phüntso Wangye and Ngabö went to Lhasa. [They came with the Advance Force]. They came in the 8th month. They were called the Advance Force [Tib. ངོན་འགྲོ་རུ་ཁག]. Zhang Jingwu came from Tromo. After that, Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan came and we were their soldiers. Fan Ming came at the end of 1951 from the north. We had already arrived by the time he entered Lhasa. At first we, the dance troupe, lived in an old Tibetan regiment [their barracks] called Dosenge [Tib. རྡོ་སེང་གེ] [where the Shambala Restaurant is now]. It was located right beside the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> [Gyantse] Regiment's quarters [Tib. ང་དང་དམག་སྒར]. [Note: From this point, the tape runs without sound for a very long time and then starts recording again.] This was the Dance Troupe of the Tibet Military Area Command which had changed its name many times, but it was the dance troupe that invited the Dalai Lama to watch the show in 1959.   

**Q:**  You were talking about the Tibetan soldiers doing something to the girls in the dance troupe, right?   

**A:**  The Tibet Military Area Command had very few women, but we had many females in the dance troupe. The Tibetan soldiers really were terrible and had bad behavior. We in the dance troupe had to get up early in the morning and practice singing--"ah ah"--I didn't have to do this, but the girl singers did. The [Tibetan] soldiers would stand on the roof and pick up their dresses and urinate facing the girls. [Laughter] When the girls would turn away, then soldiers would go on the other side and urinate in front of them to embarrass them. Then we, the young Tibetan soldiers, would pick up rocks and throw them at the soldiers. The split was already there at this time. This was the end of 1951.   

**Q:**  Did you, as a Tibetan, go and say hello to the Tibetan soldiers?   

**A:**  No, we were afraid they would kill us [or beat us]. We didn't go to [downtown] Lhasa much as we did not have much money. If we went, four people would go together. Especially when the girls went. Four to five armed soldiers would go with them. When the soldiers first arrived, we just went around the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a>, but we didn't have money to buy things and we didn't have much grain for eating. The main obstacle for this was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ]. Lukhangwa told Zhang Guohua that it was worse to go hungry than to be defeated in war [Tib. དམག་ཤོར་བ་ལས། གྲོད་ཁོག་ལྟོགས་པ་སྡུག་གི་རེད].   

**Q:**  When did he say this?   

**A:**  He said this at the end of 1951, although we weren't there to hear it ourselves. Then we soldiers started work at Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག] opening the virgin, empty land there for planting.   

**Q:**  When did this planting start?   

**A:**  At the end of 1951.   

**Q:**  What did you plant?   

**A:**  First, we had to turn over the land, take out the thorns and bring in fertilizer. We brought manure from the bathrooms in Lhasa. We also collected bones and burned those to make fertilizer. We collected a lot of manure.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a song making fun of the People's Liberation Army, "Having good firewood, we don't have time to burn bones; Having the Dalai Lama, we don't have time for liberation [Tib. མེ་ཤིང་གཤག་པ་བཞགས་ནས, རུས་གོག་འབུད་ལོངས་མི་འདུག།ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་བཞགས་ནས, བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་གཏོང་ལོང་མི་འདུག]"?   

**A:**  Yes. We had no rice or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> to eat, and even when we got barley, we had no way to grind it, so we ate boiled peas, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲན་མ] Lentils, peas.">trema</a> [Tib. སྲན་མ]. At this time, Ngabö [I was young so I only heard this later] and Tsarong [Tib. ཚ་རོང] sold peas to the People's Liberation Army. We didn't grind them, just boiled them. This was usually used for the horse's fodder. This was the black, round kind of pea. Because of this, we called the singers by the nickname trema <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] A clarinet type of wind instrument played by monks in religious services.">gyaling</a> because while they were eating the boiled trema, they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> well and sounded like the Tibetan clarinet, the gyaling [Tib. རྒྱ་གླིང]. [Laughter].   

**Q:**  Did you eat this every morning?   

**A:**  This was specifically for the girls in our dance troupe. The soldiers didn't have enough to eat to be full. The reason for this was that [the Tibetan government] obstructed the sale of grain to us. We were young then, kids. In 1952, in February, the Tibetan Military Area Command Cadre School [Tib. ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ] was started. So we were sent to that school.   

**Q:**  Was it a school for the Tibetans?   

**A:**  It was for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>   

**Q:**  Was It [was] located in the place where Tibet University now is located?   

**A:**  Yes. The current name is Tibet University [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ]. For one year there was no building and we stayed in tents. At this time, we worked for half the day and went to school for the other half. Our work was planting cabbages, potatoes, and radishes, and some were also doing construction work, building houses. At this time, they taught us the Tibetan language [Lhasa dialect and written Tibetan]. This was the main activity. The students were mainly Chinese. There were about 500-600 students. We knew a little of the [Tibetan] a, b, c's [Tib. ཀ, ཁ, ག], but the Chinese knew nothing to start. The head of the school was Tan Guansan. At this time, Zhang Guohua was the Commander, the Magji, and Tan Guansan was the Political Commissar [Tib. chab srid uyön] and also the Party Secretary, Shu ji [Ch. shu ji], that is, the number one in the Party and also the head of the school. We were studying for half the day and doing labor for half the day, and they also held the political study [sessions] in the evening. We only were able to hold classes for two months because after that the People's Association caused disturbances.   

**Q:**  What kind of disturbances were there?   

**A:**  Dobdo monks came and wanted to start fights in the market. I was young then, so don't know about these events well and in detail. At that time, we were in the dance troupe and there were 10 of us who were sent to the school. When we went to the market, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Regiment soldiers would push us and spit at us, and they would throw stones at us from the roof.   

**Q:**  So at this time, the People's Liberation Army soldiers were not allowed to go to the marketplace?   

**A:**  I would go to visit <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> taking soldiers with the leaders. I was the translator and we were going to make friends with them and make a united front [Ch. tong zhan bu]. Otherwise, the soldiers weren't permitted to simply go to the market [on their off time]. Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were high officials and they went to meet the high officials in Lhasa. We went to meet the people working on the culture [Tib. རིག་གནས], the fourth rank, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> khenjung, and we also went to visit Tshatru [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ] Rimpoche. At this time, we went to make friends with the kudrak. The kudrak were wearing brocade <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>, et cetera, and I wore only the Liberation Brand sneakers [Ch. qiu xie]. They said that this was not appropriate [Tib. ལན་པོ་མི་འདུག], so our leader gave me four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> to buy myself a pair of regular leather shoes. The shoes cost over three dayan. These were the first leather shoes (western style) I ever had. The remainder of the money I gave to my leader. He said, "I don't want it, you keep it." So I used it to buy sweets and shared them with the girls in the dance troupe. I remember this clearly. I was 12 years old then. This was the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> disturbance. The People's Liberation Army soldiers could not go out on their own and the People's Liberation Army was not permitted to buy things from the market. They had no money anyway. The Lhasa people weren't too bad to us. The worst were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> monks and the Tibetan soldiers. The dobdo would push us and spit at us in the market. There was a rule. If anyone hit you, do not hit them back. If anyone says something bad to you, do not reply badly [in kind]. The People's Liberation Army soldiers were very angry but could do nothing about it. The representatives of the Mimang [People's Association] of Tibet told Zhang Jingwu their opinion when the National People's Congress [The Assembly] said, "The price of barley and butter has risen so the livelihood of the masses has become poorer and we cannot make a living. The People's Liberation Army's coming to Tibet was said to be to liberate Tibet, but we didn't get happiness and instead the suffering became more. Therefore, the People's Liberation Army should return home. In the past, there were the Ambans [Imperial Commissioners]. So like this, Zhang Jingwu should stay as a representative of the Ambans while the other soldiers should leave." I didn't see their document at this time but heard about it verbally when the leader announced it. And the leader said that we should not let the reactionaries find any anything to blame on us. We should make ourselves self-sufficient and make a trading relationship with India and buy grains from there. At that time, there wasn't any mass big disturbance.   

**Q:**  When did the disturbance take place?   

**A:**  In 1952, in February, the Tibet Military Area Command was started. In the 3rd month, the disturbances started. I recall this because I went to dance at the inauguration of the Tibet Military Area Command. The disturbances started just after the Tibetan New Year in March. We were not allowed to go out at all during the New Year. But on the 15th of 1st month, we kids went to see the Butter Sculpture Festival, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ] The festival on the 15th of the first Tibetan month when butter sculptures were exhibited.">Jönga Chöpa</a>, with many people. The Lhasa people didn't do anything. Some old ladies said, "Ningje nyingje [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ] [poor things, poor things]" and gave us sweets saying "Have some sweets," when we were looking at the sweets in the shops. But we were not allowed to take them. We had to say we didn't want any. I was the smallest in the lineup. The first time I ate Indian sweets was when I bought the shoes. So my first shoes were the result of the disturbances brought about by Lukhangwa. Our school was stopped in the 4th month and we returned to our office. We stayed in Dosenge and made preparations for war. We built fortifications at Dosenge. At night we weren't allowed to undress and we slept in our clothes so we would be ready for war. This was in February-March before the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> were yet to be dismissed. It is said that they called up to Lhasa the Shigatse Artillery Regiment [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་དམག་སྒར]. At this time, we did not tease or bother the [Tibetan] soldiers, they just stoned us. But Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua went to the Dalai Lama for giving greetings for the New Year. And they presented gifts on behalf of Deng Xiaoping and the Liu Bochen. We, the members of the dance troupe, went to carry the things and we also performed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. At [the time of the] New Year [in 1952], our leaders Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua, representing Mao, Liu Shaoqi, Deng Xiaoping and Liu Bochen, gave the Dalai Lama presents. They gave gold and turquoise and old things from the Manchu Palace. I performed with the dance troop in the Norbulinga Palace. So from one direction, there was disagreement, and from the other, there was friendship. We had an audience with the Dalai Lama at the Norbulinga and gave the presents at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Potala. Then the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were dismissed and the Panchen Lama arrived in Tibet. When the PRC came to Tibet after the two sitsab were dismissed [he arrived on April 28th, one day after the sitsab resigned], the dance troupe performed again. Then the Panchen Lama came and we, the dance troupe, went to welcome him by beating the drums.   

**Q:**  When the Panchen Lama was coming to Lhasa, did he have to stay in Nagchuka [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་ཁ] for a while?   

**A:**  It is said he had to stay for 10 days. The reason was that the situation was not calm in Tibet. When the Panchen Lama arrived, I went to welcome him [with the dance troupe]. There was a Chinese proverb that said, "Kill two birds with one stone [Tib. རྡོ་གཅིག་གིས་བྱེའུ་གཉིས་བསད་པ་རེད]." We were talking to each other internally that on one hand, the Dalai Lama became amicable [Tib. མཐུན་པོ] with the Zhongyang and two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were dismissed. And on the other hand, if the two sitsab were there, the Dalai Lama could not hold power, but when the sitsab were gone, the Dalai Lama and the Kashag got the power. The sitsab were close to the Dalai Lama during their time, but between the Dalai Lama and the Kashag, there was big gap [Tib. མཐོ་དམན་ཤོར་བ]. At that time, there were Ngabö and Surkhang in the Kashag. There was also an argument regarding the Panchen Lama's reception in Tibet, like whether the Dalai Lama would be seated on the throne. At this time, the Tibetan government's officers in charge were Ngabö and Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར]. Liushar was in charge of the foreign affairs office. On the Panchen's, side it was Che Jigme [Tib. ཅེས་འཇིགས་མེད]. Then, from the Military Area Command side, there was also Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming. They discussed the arrangements.   

**Q:**  At this time, was Fan Ming in the Military Area Command?   

**A:**  He was in the Military Area Command, but he was mainly the leader of the Tibet Work Committee [Ch. xi zang gong wei].   

**Q:**  What was the main problem at that time?   

**A:**  At this time, the main problem was a disagreement over where the Panchen Lama would be seated. The [Panchen Lama's] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> office and Fan Ming said that the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama are Gyawa Yabse [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས] [Amitaba and Avalokiteshvara], so their rank is the same. Equal. Therefore, both of them have to prostrate to each other. The Kashag said that the Panchen Lama had to prostrate before the Dalai Lama because he is older than the Panchen Lama. The Panchen's Nangmagang said the Panchen Lama would not do the prostration before the Dalai Lama because the two of them are equal. They could both exchange <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> [Tib. སྣེ་འཕྲོད་མཇལ་དར]. They had a serious argument on this matter. The Nangmagang said that if this was what was decided, then the Panchen Lama would not come to Lhasa, but will go straight to Shigatse. Finally, it was decided that the Dalai Lama would not be seated on the throne but will stand near the throne and the Panchen Lama will come up and offer the khata.   

**Q:**  They decided not to prostrate, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama would not offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the Panchen Lama, right?   

**A:**  It was decided not to exchange <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves. The Panchen Lama came from a long distance, so he would have to offer the khata to the Dalai Lama. It was decided that when the Panchen Lama was staying in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and when the Dalai Lama would go to see him, the Dalai Lama would offer a khata to the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  Was it decided that the Dalai Lama would be seated on the throne and he would get down from the throne when the Panchen Lama entered his room?   

**A:**  I heard that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a>, Ngabö and Surkhang, discussed this and decided to do that. Trindorla: When Che Jigme was released from jail [he was jailed in 1964], he died a few months later. It is said that he told someone that "I will not talk specifically about my activities but will say that everything I did was a mistake!" The Panchen Lama stayed at Nagchuka until the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the People's Association issues were settled. Then he came to Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན]. At this time, the Panchen Lama was planning to go straight from Yangpajen to Shigatse. The Nangmagang caused this trouble. There is a movie that shows this clearly. Then it was settled that the Dalai Lama would not be sitting on a throne but would be standing beside the throne. Then the Panchen Lama would enter and present him with a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> since he had come from afar. Then the Panchen Lama would stay at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> and the Dalai Lama would come to the Tsuglagang and would give the Panchen Lama a khata in return. So Che Jigme and Ngabö and Surkhang made this kind of a compromise. However, when the Panchen Lama came to meet the Dalai Lama at the Nyiwö Phodrang [Tib. nyi 'od pho brang'] room, he stayed on the throne and did not get off from it. The Panchen Lama was only a kid of 12 so he didn't understand and thought that the Dalai Lama was sitting on the throne and he presented him the khata on the throne. The Dalai Lama just bent his head forward [in other words the plan wasn't followed]. This was captured on film and is clear to see. The Panchen's Nangmagang argued with the Kashag saying "You have deceived us." Che Jigme fought with Liushar and Ngabö. Some of them said they took out knives and said they were going stab them, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> and those people stopped them and said, "Don't do this."   

**Q:**  Did Che Jigme take out a knife?   

**A:**  No, his retinue took out their knives. So at this time, one issue was that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama would have thrones of equal height. Second, was that they should face each other [this indicates equal status, if not then one would sit on the side]. But on this day, the Panchen Lama's throne was much lower than the Dalai Lama's, but the Panchen Lama being a child didn't care about it and went in and sat on it, and it also was not facing the Dalai Lama's. And the two thrones were not facing one another. There is a Tibetan saying, "The tiger and snow lion face to face [Tib. སྟག་སེང་ཁ་སྤྲོད]" [i.e., equal power] This was to show that the Panchen Lama was lower in status. Fan Ming and Zhang Guohua argued a lot about the seating arrangement. In fact, nowadays, the Chinese still argue about these things. Ngabö and Liushar replied, "We reported to the Dalai Lama and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> what we had discussed and we didn't deceive them. The Yigtsang probably didn't tell the Drönyerchemmo. We have nothing to do with setting up the thrones, et cetera. This is not the duty of the kalön and at that time, we were not near that place."   

**Q:**  Was this true?   

**A:**  I don't know. Che Jigme said that Ngabö and Liushar were cunning like a damaru [a small drum with two-faces [Tib. དྲ་མ་རུ]]. The main people in authority in the Tibetan government were Ngabö and Surkhang. Liushar wasn't a kalön. When the Panchen Lama was living in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>, the Dalai Lama came and met him. They spoke in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> dialect and they were very amicable.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to meet the Panchen Lama, did the Panchen Lama sit on a throne?   

**A:**  I hear that it was informal and they didn't discuss anything and it was a loose, easy-going meeting. At this time, the Dalai Lama sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> [Tib. རམ་པ] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> to the Tsuglagang. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> had picked this candidate as Panchen Lama while the Tibetan government had picked another incarnation candidate from Litang as the Lama and he was at Drepung. So I heard that Ramba came as the representative of the Dalai Lama and the Kashag and said, "You are the reincarnation of the 9th Panchen Lama, and overtly accepted him as Panchen Lama." Ramba accompanied the Panchen Lama to Shigatse. From then on, the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama were friendly. But the Kashag and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> had very bad feelings and stayed at odds over power arrangements. They were talking about the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama, but actually, they were striving for their own power. So Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming backed different ones. The Northwest [troops and bureau] backed the Panchen Lama and the Southwest supported the Dalai Lama. When the Northwest had to say something against the conduct of the Southwest, they made the Panchen Lama say it. They were not friendly among themselves. When they could not meet Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou, they were reporting their opinions through them [the Dalai and Panchen Lamas]. So after the Panchen Lama came to Tibet, then our school was started again and our standard of living improved. We bought rice from India which was used for the soldiers in Shigatse. We also got dried milk and meat in cans from India. I think this came from America. This was the first time we got this. We got the dried milk. The liquid milk, only the leaders got. In 1952, we planted vegetables and radishes and potatoes in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> [means Nortölinga] at the [new] 8-1 State Farm [Ch. bayi; Tib. ཞིང་ར]. In 1954, in May, I was sent together with about 100 people to school in Chengdu.   

**Q:**  What did they teach in the school [in Lhasa]?   

**A:**  They taught Tibetan writing, the spoken [language], and politics.   

**Q:**  Who were your teachers?   

**A:**  There were many Tibetan teachers. For example, Tsarong, Horkhang Sonam Pembar [Tib. hor khang bsod namd dpal 'byor], Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན], Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད], Tshatru Rimpoche, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Champa Tenthar [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར], who later joined the revolt an died in the jail.   

**Q:**  Did it become easier for you to go to the market in 1952?   

**A:**  Yes. It became loose and we were paid a salary like 2-4 dayan. After 1954, we were allowed to go to the market in the daytime. However, we weren't allowed to go to restaurants. At night, we weren't permitted to go.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you allowed to go to the tea shops and talk with the Tibetans?   

**A:**  We were not allowed to go to the tea shops and restaurants, but we could buy some snacks [though].   

**A:**  At that time, there were many Khambas in Lhasa, so were you allowed to make relations with them?   

**A:**  Yes, and there were several Baba [Batang] restaurants in Lhasa, and Phünwang and my brother used to go to them. But I never went there. They sold Chinese noodles. At this time, we were told by our leaders that we had to do things that would benefit the Tibetan masses. At this time, Phünwang and Phüntra were the translators for Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and the Dalai Lama. We were lower translators for the masons and construction workers. For example, at this time there were no toilets in Lhasa and when we said that we should build toilets, they refused saying that we Tibetans didn't have the habit to defecate in a toilet. There was shit and urine everywhere and people were defecating and urinating everywhere. At this time, I was the one involved with building public toilets in the city. The workers were Tibetans and I was the translator. I knew just a little of the Lhasa dialect, not much. So when some Lhasans asked "What are you building," I answered a kyagkang [Tib. སྐྱག་ཁང] ["shit house"]. This was the term in the Batang dialect. Then they asked, "What is a Kyakhang?" Then I said it was a place for shitting and they said, "Oh a sangjö [Tib. གསང་སྤྱོད]," and laughed. Later, we decided to build some public toilets. Then we also did cleanliness and street sweeping. Then we taught Tibetans how to plant vegetable seeds we had brought from China.   

**Q:**  After the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were dismissed and you went to the market, were you pushed and shoved?   

**A:**  There was some [of this], but it was much less. For example, in 1953, a People's Liberation Army soldier and a Tibetan soldier jointly made rounds. But during the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] Prayer Festival, the shengo had all the power. They were beating the poor people. At this time in 1953, when the shengo was making his rounds, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> said, "Oh Chojo." At this time, everyone has to move away, but one beggar or a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> didn't move and they beat and killed him. So the People's Liberation Army soldier and some others who were making rounds got angry because they had affection [Tib. བརྩེ་གདུང] for the poor. That evening after dark, they hid and waited at that place and when the shengo came, they grabbed him and beat him. This was the first time in Tibetan history that a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་ཞལ་ངོ] The disciplinary head of the whole monastery (as opposed to a college).">Tsogchen shengo</a> had been beaten. They beat the shengo because he was treating a poor man badly. This led to a big argument in Lhasa. The Kashag said to the Military Area Command that "Some of your people beat our shengo. This is terrible and we are going to expel them." The Military Area Command said, "We have punished [fined] them." Then the Kashag said, "We want to judge the soldiers ourselves." I told Zhang Jingwu that this was not like the mainland where landlords were beaten. In Tibet, things hadn't been reformed and this kind of behavior was not good. We had to know Tibetan customs. Later, these soldiers were sent back to China. In 1952, Tibetans were bullying us since we had just arrived, but in 1953, we bullied them. In 1954, we went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to perform and we ate noodles. We were friendly then.   

**Q:**  When did cars reach Lhasa?   

**A:**  In 1954. When we came in 1951, it took more than 50 days on foot. In 1954, when they were in Chamdo for two months, the Dalai Lama came on his way to Beijing to the National People's Congress meeting. We went in an old American car produced during the 2nd World War which was called Dodge. It was covered with canvas and the Dalai Lama went in a better Russian car. Zhang Jingwu was with him. The Panchen Lama went via Xining and Xi'an [the north route] to Beijing. The tutor Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche was with the Dalai Lama. I don't remember if Lingstang [Tib. གླིང་ཚང] was there. Trijang was politically very clever and he told us students to study hard. The older tutor Lingtsang was a real lama and didn't know about politics. There were about 100 in the group including the Dalai Lama's mother. From Xi'an, they went by train and they met Zhou Enlai. After the Dalai Lama came to Chengdu after his inspection tour was over, I was called to act as a translator. When we were in the Cadre's School, there were some Khambas who said that they were not going to learn [Central] Tibetan dialect because they knew Kham dialect. But I said, "I am going to learn it because it is an additional dialect." That's why I could speak the Lhasa dialect quite fluent. At that time, I had already joined the Youth League, though I hadn't joined the party. I went to Chongqing to meet him. At this time, Phünwang was not a translator but an official. Phüntra was a translator. But Phüntra and the Dalai Lama had an argument. Once the Dalai Lama said something and he didn't understand and fought [verbally] with the Dalai Lama. He [Phüntra] has a hot temper. So some of us acted as the translator and Phüntra was sent to Beijing for study. I heard that nobody had fought with the Dalai Lama in history. At this time, I knew a little of the Lhasa dialect, so it was easier [for me] to understand. Then Zhang Jingwu made me the Dalai Lama's translator together with Phünwang's younger brother, Thuwangla [Tib. ཐུབ་དབང་ལགས]. Thuwang did most political translating. The Dalai Lama asked me if I understood Tibetan since I was so young. Phüntra was left in Beijing and did not return to Tibet. When the Dalai Lama went to shows, I would translate and I would ask him what foods he wanted. I did this for the Dalai Lama and his mother on the way home. I did this for a little more than a month and the Dalai Lama liked me. At this time, the Zhongyang United Front head Liu Geping was with the Dalai Lama. Liu asked me if I wanted to come to Beijing to study after that. So that is how I got to Beijing.   

**Q:**  In 1955, in Beijing, there was a big meeting with the Tibetan government and the Panchen's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a>, what was decided at this?   

**A:**  One issue was that after the 9th Panchen Lama was expelled from Tibet, the Tibetan government took some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> (estates) of the Panchen Lama. At this time, the Panchen Lama had three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and 47 or 49 shiga; Lhatse [Tib. lha rste], Ngamring [Tib. ངམ་རིང], and Phüntosling [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང] [were the 3 dzong]. These three dzong were called Lhangam Phünsum. And the Shigatse Governor, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] Refers to Shigatse dzong as well as the 2 heads of the Shigatse dzong while the Panchen Lama was in exile. After he returned in 1952, the 2 heads of Shigatse dzong were just called Dzongpön.">Jidzong</a> [Tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང], was sent by the Kashag. This was in 1923. So the power of Shigatse was taken over by the government of Tibet. Then the new agreement was to end the Shigtase Jidzong and the power would be as before. At this time, Fan Ming wanted to have the Panchen Lama have the same power as the Dalai Lama, but Mao said they are not the same. Mao held out his two index fingers horizontal and then turned then so that one was on top of the other. Mao also said that the Panchen Lama and Dalai Lama are "chief and regular," tsophel [Tib. གཙོ་ཕལ].   

**Q:**  At that time, did Zhang Jingwu and those people agree to this?   

**A:**  They were the ones who wanted to prove [Tib. ཁུངས་སྐྱེལ] the chief and the regular. Mao said, for example, "A family can have only one head; the father or the mother. If we establish the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, we need one chairman [Ch. shu zhi]. Two zhushi will not do. In the CCP, Zhou Enlai and Liu Shaoqi are able and get along, but there can only be one chairman, me." So Mao settled that if we established a Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, the main head would be the Dalai Lama. The two deputy directors [Ch. fu zhu ren] would be the Panchen Lama and Zhang Guohua. Mao settled this [explained more later]. Then, beneath the chairman, there was an uyön who was appointed by the Kashag. One from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> and then one from the Chamdo Liberation Area. Then there was one from each sect. The plan was for 50 or so committee members. The general secretary [Ch. mi shu zhang] was to be Ngabö. The vice general secretaries [Tib. ཕུ༹་མི་ཤུ་ཞང] were Che Jigme and Chen Jinbo. The Dalai Lama said this was very good. The Dalai Lama often told me to study well. "Do the Chinese bully you?" I said, "No, they do not." The Dalai Lama was young and I was young, so he liked me and he also liked studying.   

**Q:**  In 1954, there was a major meeting in Beijing [question not finished]   

**A:**  It was the National People's Congress.   

**Q:**  The meeting must have been on Tibet?   

**A:**  The meeting took 100 days and it was in 1953.   

**Q:**  Was it presided over by Li Weihan?   

**A:**  Yes. At the meeting was Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, Wang Qimei, Fan Ming, Ya Hanzhang, Li Weihan and Fan Ming's colleague Mo Shengzhong.   

**A:**  Where is Mo Shenzhong now?   

**A:**  He is still alive in Lanzhou and he is in his 80s. His memory is quite good. These two were from the Northwest, and he is not afraid of anything since he was a soldier. Mainly, they settled the matter of Tibet and the Northwest not being friendly. It was related to the power. If the Panchen Lama became high, Fan Ming would also become a little higher. Sometimes they made meaningless arguments. Fan Ming was arguing that China should treat the Panchen Lama and Dalai Lama as the same rank and the same authority.   

