# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0055.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tsering Chödrön [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་སྒྲོན]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kathmandu, Nepal  
**Date of Interview:** 7 March 3 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Unknown  
**Name:** Tsering Chödrön [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་སྒྲོན]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1924  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsering Chödrön [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་སྒྲོན] was the daughter of the Shölkang aristocratic family. In this interview, she talks about her late husband [Nyishaba] who worked as one of the staff officers of Lhalu and how she and other kudrak fled from Derge via Jomda to Chamdo along with some Tibetan soldiers. The subject also tells about going to Targye Gomba with her husband when Ngabö went to China.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0055_01/H_0055_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Aunty, in 1949, the Communists fought the Guomindang and were victorious. After that the Chinese came to Tibet. In 1950, Chamdo was lost and the Dalai Lama took the religious and the political power. Before that there were much talks regarding the Chinese. Where were you staying at that time?   

**A:**  When Chamdo was lost, we were at the Gamtog Drukha [Tib. སྐམ་ཐོག་གྲུ་ཁ] ferry site. That's where the Chinese first attacked. My late Kungö [husband -- Nyishabpa [Tib. ཉི་ཞབས་པ] was the Gamtog Tsasho [Tib. ཚྭ་ཤོ] (the Custom and Salt Tax Collector). He was left there as the representative of Lhalu when he went back [to Lhasa]. My husband initially was a 7th rank lay [common] official [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ] on the staff of Lhalu in charge of economic affairs (Tib. དུགö་དོདམ [འདུ་འགོད་དོ་དམ]) in Derge to collect gold and look after the agricultural fields. When Lhalu left, the tsasho had to be given out, right? So it was given half to us and half to the another tsasho. We split it up and we were left there as the acting tsasho official. Since it was said that the Chinese were coming, everyone was running away. The late Kungö was quite stupid [Tib. གླེན་རྟགས་ཚ་པོ] [implies bravado] and stayed in Derge working on economic affairs and looking after the fields. He was also tsasho and collected the taxes and stayed at Gamtog Drukha. While we were there, it was well known [Tib. སྐད་གྲགས་ཞེ་དྲད་བྱས] that the Chinese were coming. I said that we should leave an acting representative [Tib. ངོ་ཚབ] and that we should leave. He said that we could not. Until now, he said, we survived by the grace of the Tibetan Government and so whatever may come, we must stay and look after the government's income. He was kind of honest and sincere [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག]. We got a lot of messages that the Chinese were coming and many people probably were coming. I went to the Gadang Regiment. The Governor of Derge (Tib. དེརྒེ་ཇིགྱབ [སྡེ་དགེ་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]) was Karchungwa [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང་བ], the head of the cavalry was Shakjang Surpa [Tib. ཤག་བྱང་ཟུར་པ] and the head of the rural militia was the Tsidrung Ela [Tib. ཨས་ལགས]. The militia was conscripted from Shotalhosum [Tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ]: Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ] Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང]. When we heard that the Chinese were coming, Kungö made me stay at the regiment with him and Kungö said that he had to stay as tsasho for the time being [Tib. གནས་སྐབས]. Then Tsidrung Ela said that he needed an assistant, so Kungö stayed and we left a servant as the tsasho official because there wasn't much to collect at that time. Then the Chinese came through all the ferry sites and overran [Tib. མནན] the place in one day.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Doji [Tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] was Lhalu, right?   

**A:**  At that time, Lhalu had been changed and Ngabö had already arrived there.   

**Q:**  When Lhalu was there, did he send orders to conscript soldiers and make preparations [for the war] or what edict did he send?   

**A:**  Probably he didn't prepare to conscript soldiers.   

**Q:**  Did he leave border guards?   

**A:**  The border patrols [Tib. ས་སྲུང] of the Gadang Regiment were there with the gyagpön, rupön and jupön. There were guards stationed at 3-4 ferry sites like Gamtog, Lima Chuka [Tib. ལི་མ་ཆུ་ཁ] and Nongpatö [Tib. ནོང་པ་སྟོད] etc. At that time, normally one could leave a representative for the tsasho, but because Gamtog Drukha was the largest ferry site, the actual tsasho had to stay there with one rupön. At that time, Kungö [my husband] was the head of the militia and he was in the regiment with Tsidrung Ela. The depön was Karchungwa. And there was Shakchang Surpa who was the depön of the Thadang [Tib. ཐ་དང] Regiment. The Chinese took Gamtog Drukha in one night. When news reached us that all the ferry sites were lost, Karchungwa just went through the motions of sending soldiers to the top of the mountains [Tib. རྩེ་རི], but the main regiment was ready to run away because we could no longer stay there. There was a way to detour around the mountain and flee, so soon after that place was lost, we moved to Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ] where there was a main regiment with its depön. While we were there, it was said that the Chinese were coming, so we didn't have any choice but to run away, so we ran away. Our kungö, the poor thing, was an honest and humble person who never embezzled [Tib. ས་སྒོ]o the people in the area liked him a lot and said that he must look after the women and children living with the main regiment. At that time, there was a kind of rumor saying that the miser will not let the regiment take the things of the regiment and that these things belonged to the miser. So my husband was told to protect the things that belonged to the regiment and stay with the women [soldiers' wives]. He was instructed to gather the women and lead them. Then we all fled together with the regiment since the Chinese were coming. When everyone was running away, Gyagpön Migmar Wangdü [Tib. མིག་དམར་དབང་འདུས] of the Gadang Regiment got left behind on top of the mountain. I fled with the soldiers and while we were at one monastery it was said that the Chinese were fast approaching. All the people were running away and there wasn't anybody fighting because we heard that the Chinese had surrounded the upper part of this place. When we got to Kyushung [Tib. ?], some of those on the mountain top went around and ran away and some of them were killed. When the gyagpön and 7-8 others arrived, they said they fled via Dzikar [Tib. རྫི་དཀར]. When we sent scouts, they said that there were only some bandits and no Chinese. Later, we came to know that they were Chinese. Even when the rupön and gyagpön of the Gadang Regiment came, they said, "There were no Chinese," and that there were "just some Khambas going back and forth." So that night we relaxed and retired. However, while we were asleep, the horses and mules got frightened, so we thought that bandits or thieves were coming and they were doing something to the horses and mules. So I got up and told my servant to go to have a look. At that time, we had two people on guard carrying guns. The horses and mules were tied around and we kept the possessions and slept in the middle. Usually, we would not sleep and would sit there, but that night we relaxed and I slept with my chupa on, loosening my belt because I felt itchy since I hadn't taken off my chupa for many days. Our servant went to check and said that Ela's horse was missing. I told my servant to look for the horse. Soon after he left, there were two shots and I thought it was from bandits. Two more shots rang out. Probably 2 of the sentry guards fell asleep and they were killed and then another 2 guards were also killed. When we got up, the Chinese had already reached the upper part and we could hear the panting of the soldiers. Then the Chinese fired a lot of guns. When I stood up, the bullets were passing near my ears with the sound, "siu siu." Something like a cannon shell hit our things. When the Chinese shot a flare, we could see everything--that the soldiers were coming forward. There wasn't any place to run, but we had no choice but to run away. They were firing cannons and there wasn't any place to hide. When I ran away, I fell in the water and two of them [brother and sister] were afraid and were saying, "How shall we run away?" Anyway, all the people climbed up to the mountain pass and ran away. We didn't have boots to wear and belts to tie our chupa. I had my apron with me so I just tied my chupa with the apron and didn't have boots on when I ran away. All of the women couldn't breathe because we were very scared, but we ran away amidst the shower of bullets exploding in front of us. I said, "May the Lama and the Three Jewels save us." [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག་མཁྱེན]. At that time, my late brother and sister were with me and they were supporting me. In this way, many of us climbed up the to the mountain pass. Some of them got hit with bullets and fell down. The Chinese said that they didn't kill people, but actually they did kill people. A woman doctor whom I knew also fell in that place. When we were climbing up the mountain, the sounds of gunshots lessened a little bit. When we reached the mountain pass, the day broke and our breathing was restored. I couldn't walk so I was put on a horse like a load and later I was able to mount the horse. On the top of the mountain pass, I met Karchung Depön who had fled earlier. He was asking if his wife was around. We couldn't speak since we could not open our mouths as we were so winded [Tib. དབུགས་འགག]. He was saying how bad it was, but we could not speak at all. At that time, I found a piece of turnip and I just rubbed it on my apron and ate it. Then I got kind of relaxed and I could talk a little bit. Before that, we didn't get any food. After crossing the pass, we reached Tagbu [Tib. སྟག་ཕུ]. Chamdo was on the other side of the mountain. Some wives of the soldiers had some tsamba, tea and butter. They boiled tea and gave all of us some tea. However, all of us didn't have bowls, so the women took out their bowls with silver lining [Tib. དངུལ་ཤན] and gave us tea. I drank the tea with a little bit of tsamba. It was very helpful. So many people had run away that the houses were empty in that place. There were many of us who didn't have boots and belts, so we went to search for those things and we found some worn out boots. Otherwise, everything had been taken away. We got some tsamba from some nomads which all of us grabbed and ate a little bit. While on the Tagbu mountain pass near Chamdo, one could hear the shooting in Chamdo. It was said that the Chinese had come to Chamdo. Karchungwa and the others had fled. Ela and four of us were together and they said that it was time to go and Ela and two of them left. We were left behind and then we went towards Chamdo. At that time, my servant carried woolen bedding and he put it on the horse and I rode a horse which didn't have any stirrups so sometimes I almost fell off one side and sometimes on the other side. When we got there, one of our servants said they [Chinese] are pulling up the bridge called Dzasam [Tib. རྫ་ཟམ] so we should go quickly and cross the bridge. When we got there, there was so much shooting. It was the armory that was exploding since Ngabö had ordered that it be set on fire since he wasn't able to fight. I heard that Ngabö said, "We will not hand over a single bullet. If there is someone who can fight, I will give you the weapons. Otherwise, I am going to set it on fire." When we heard the sound of the explosion of the armory, we thought that the Chinese had arrived, but when we got there, the Chinese hadn't arrived, but they had surrounded the place. The Chamdo people were very nice and gave us bread and drinks. The women were saying, "Poor things! [Tib. ཤ་ཚ (this is the Khamba equivalent of nyingje)]" At that time, the relative of Dzikar, Abo Thugse [Tib. རྫི་དཀར་ཨ་ཕོ་ཐུགས་སྲས] was with me and the two of us had a servant and we had some items like woolen bedding and some things. We came along with the soldiers who didn't have anything to take. We went to the Horkhang (house) in Chamdo and people were taking the things that belonged to Horkhang like the chupa of the Kungö and his wife. I could recognize some of those things. When we inquired about Horkhang, we were told that they were staying with the family of Shitsang [Tib. ཞི་ཚང] Rimpoche. Their belongings were being moved and Sawangchemmo [Ngabö] was said to have gone to Drugu [Tib. གྲུ་གུ] monastery. We traveled the whole night and arrived at Chamdo in the evening when it was dark. Tsidrung Ela knew an innkeeper called Tagye Dranga [Tib. ?] and he said, "It is useless for you to stay like this because we heard that the Chinese have arrived near by. It would be better if you leave." But at that time, the soldiers of the Gadang Regiment were coming with us with the hope that they could eat some of the things we had with us. Then Chamdo people gave me some horses and we left Chamdo at night with one servant. We traveled all night to the Tagbu mountain pass, not knowing Horkhang was staying. We got to the place where there was a water mill at day break. When we inquired about where Horkhang was, they said that we had passed that place. Then we told them to send a guide with us and we came down again and we met Horkhang's wife and family. They were all crying and I was so tired because I had traveled for so many days and I didn't feel like crying. I fell asleep while eating. There I met Gapela [Tib. དགའ་དཔལ་ལགས] and Horkhang's wife, and 3-4 government officials like Tsidrung Drumba la [Tib. bhrum pa lags] and the children. They gave me some tsamba with tea and then I went upstairs and I fell asleep. At that time, the other people might have been searching for me not knowing I was asleep upstairs. Then they found that I was asleep and said that they had been searching for me. At Chamdo, the Chinese came to get Horkhang Kungö and we thought that we couldn't bear the responsibility for Kungö to be taken alone. After that, the Chinese came to call on him again. I thought that Horkhang was going to be killed, but the Chinese were working on the army salary, so they called Horkhang who was in charge of the salary. The Chinese in Chamdo were saying that they would guarantee his safety and they wanted him to come. That place was located quite near to Chamdo. Then Horkhang and Tsidrung Drumpala went to the Chinese. After a while, the Chinese told people to bring the other kudrak and they took them over there. After they left, it was almost sunset. They also sent people to bring the wives and the children and the servants. At that time, Gapela was pregnant, but she had to walk all the way, so she almost had a miscarriage on the way. At that time, all of the officials were made to sit on the ground while Khorang Lama was sitting on a chair and the Chinese were also there outside the regimental building. After awhile, all the men were taken into the regiment and the women were taken by the Chinese soldiers and handed over to the lodging inn [Tib. གནས་ཚང་ར་སྤྲག]. When we were taken by the soldiers, the women in Chamdo were crying and they put some treats in our pouches and said, "You shouldn't have such a bad a time. What happened to you?" The government officials were shut up in the regiment. A day or so later, it was said that Ngabö was being brought down [to Chamdo]. At that time, Horkhang's baby sitter was kind of crying or screaming. I thought she was laughing and then she was crying and said, "Look at him, they are bringing over Sawangchemmo." He was being brought on a horse and they had taken off his golden earrings and those things and his servant was following him. At that time, I became thoughtless. They were all put in Sidogthang [Tib. སྲི་ཟློག་ཐང]. This was the place where the kudrak used to enjoy their picnics. I think Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] was there, though I didn't see him. Ngabö and those people's food must have been good, but since they were prisoners under something like house-arrest, they could not go out anywhere. We just heard about this. We were handed over to the lodging inn [Tib. གནས་ཚང] and we also were not allowed to go out. Then one day, a message came to Horkhang saying that Sawangchemmo was going to visit briefly. Horkhang Kungö and his wife were very scared wondering what might have happened. Then Ngabö and Tsögo arrived. Sawangchemmo had aged so much. He didn't have his earrings and wore an inferior chupa. On that occasion, I broke down and cried. They all cried. Nagbö came and said he wanted some sweet tea. They were so scared of offering him tea and thought, what if he got sick, they [Chinese] might say something. Horkhang's wife said we should serve the tea and they quickly gave him some tea. People were so afraid [of the Chinese] that they sort of indicated he should leave and then he left. Probably, he wanted very much to drink some sweet tea. Later, Sandutsang Nyendrala [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང་སྙན་གྲགས་ལགས] came. In the past he had been sent to China since he had good connections with the kudrak and the Chinese were suspicious [unclear]. After Chamdo was liberated, my late husband came up, and at that time he had aged. The Chinese told him that he could visit Ngabö. The Chinese told him it would be good for you to talk with Ngabö because you have good relations with him, so tell Ngabö that everything will be all right. So sometimes he went to visit him with permission and Ngabö also visited us. During those occasions, we made some good food and sweet tea and they said they wanted to play mahjong. So they played mahjong surreptitiously where Nyendrala was staying, although they were a little bit scared. So everyone sort of became more relaxed. Then around the 12th month, Sawangchemmo and some of the officials went down [to China]. Since Nyendrala had connections [with Ngabö] he also went as part of the entourage. Then we got to Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ] where Sandutsang's estate was and we stayed there.   

**Q:**  Was Nyendrala among Ngabö's retinue?   

**A:**  Since there were other government officials, he asked for leave [from the retinue] and [my husband] Nyishabpa [Tib. ཉི་ཞབས་པ] and I stayed with Nyendrala in Targye Gomba.   

**Q:**  The 17-Appointment Agreement was signed later. Previous to this, was there any talk that there should be negotiations?   

**A:**  The Chinese were saying that he [Ngabö] should go to China. If there would be no talks, then there were so many Chinese soldiers down there. When we were at Targye Gomba, it was said that the place was filled with soldiers ready to go up [to Lhasa]. After that place was liberated, there was government grain stored in the storerooms for their [Chinese] salary. If at that time, Ngabö had not held the talks, then the Chinese would have advanced to Lhasa and the Dalai Lama would have gone to India. It was definite that forceful liberation would take place. When we got to Targye Gomba, the people there were saying that there were so many soldiers that the color of the place had changed. As soon as that happened [decided to hold talks] from here, the Chinese withdrew all the troops [from Targye Gomba]. We heard this from the local people.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama was in Yadong and at that time, Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] and those people came down, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Sambo came when they were going to China.   

**Q:**  Did he go with Ngabö?   

**A:**  No. Ngabö left before that. When Ngabö left, Tsögo and Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] were with him. When people were very scared and the situation was bad, Ngabö's wife and Tsögo's wife arrived there, so Sawangchemmo was very glad.   

**Q:**  I heard that at that time Ngabö sent a letter to the Dalai Lama when he took the religious and political power saying that he was going to hold talks with the Chinese. At one time, did the situation become kind of relaxed?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about that. I don't think the situation became kind of relaxed. Anyway, the Kashag picnic was about to take place in Chamdo, but they did not know the Chinese were coming. At that time, it was said that Lhalu was there and he agreed to stay since the Kashag asked him. Then suddenly it was said that he [Lhalu] left since he got a secret message [Tib. གསང་བརྡ] from down there [unclear] [that the Chinese were arriving]. Then after about two weeks the Chinese came, so he was demoted.   

**Q:**  Earlier it was said that the miser did not like the Doji, and that the soldiers made the people suffer. How was it then?   

**A:**  It was a custom that the soldiers made them suffer since it was said that if we didn't treat the Khambas harshly (Tib. ཙུབུ [རྩུབ་པོ]), they wouldn't listen to us. It was like the proverb, "The Khamba's ears are on their ass [Tib. ཁམས་པའི་ཨམ་ཅོག་རྐུབ་ལ་ཡོད] They were forceful, so the Khambas were really not to be blamed at all. However, when Ngabö came and he ordered that everyone on the staff should treat the people nicely, no one dared to do otherwise. During Lhalu's time, things were forceful and people were scared. Below him was the 4th rupön of the Trapchi Regiment who was infamous. He was like a kungö and took meat without compensation and so there was a lot of talk. During that time we were on the staff [Tib. ལས་བྱ] of Lhalu, but we were on the Derge side in charge of land and economic affairs. The late Kungö was very good to the people and the people of Derge were very good to us. We looked after the estates and we had a salary, so the Chamdo people were extremely good to us, telling us to leave [flee] and they would send our goods. They also told the Chinese that Tsasho Nyishabpa did not suck blood and eat the flesh [exploit] of the miser and that they lived off of what they were entitled to. So when we were in Chamdo and the Chinese came to look for us, I was afraid of being imprisoned. However, the people of Derge submitted a petition to the Chinese saying that we should be given what was our due. Then the Chinese told us that we would get our things, but actually, except for a few loads of woolen chupa and some used satin chupa, they didn't give us our own chupa and they took all our belongings along with the jewelry.   

