# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0055.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tsering Chödrön [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་སྒྲོན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , , Nepal  
**Date of Interview:** March 12 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Tsering Chödrön [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་སྒྲོན]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1924  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsering Chödrön [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་སྒྲོན] was the daughter of the Shölkang aristocratic family. In this interview, she explains how her [second] husband [Sandu Nyendra] was involved with Chushigandru and how he went to India to secure weapons for them.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0055_02/H_0055_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1954 the Dalai Lama went to China and stayed for a year. Around that time the implementation of forced liberation and reforms were to begin, which started the problems and the war. Then a lot of Khambas came to Lhasa and soon the golden throne was offered, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Khambas got together and started the uprising opposing the Chinese. Many came up to Lhasa and at that time the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, or better, the Khambas, were meeting. At that time they were the ones offering the golden throne and the Chushigandru name was not yet given.   

**Q:**  Yes, the Baligyesum [Batang, Litang and Gyeltang].   

**A:**  Yes. It was said that the Baligyesum were going to offer the golden throne and so for that reason they were holding meetings. They must have been meeting for the purposes of starting the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> organization, but they would not tell us, right? So at times they did go for meetings and at times Andru Jinda used to come to our place.   

**Q:**  At that time your late husband [Nyendrala] was in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, during this time he was there.   

**Q:**  So while at Lhasa what were the Chinese doing? There were many people coming from Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> so did they kept a check on them?   

**A:**  They arrested them. Some used to disappear.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  Some among those who came to Lhasa would disappear. They must have been arresting them. Who knows? So we were in Lhasa. When we were in Kham they would not let us leave. They were at Ganzi and we were kept in the Payroll Office (Phogang). [Nyendrala was probably working for the Chinese in Ganzi]. So we requested help from Ngabö and he told them that Nyendra was a resident of Lhasa and had a lot of unfinished business so please give him leave for 1 year. So we came to Lhasa and just stayed. We did a little business, hung around with the kudraks like Ngabö and Surkhang whom he [Nyendrala] knew a long time ago. They played [mahjong]. I was at home looking after the kids and I think he used to go to where the Khambas were meeting. We stayed for a year and were supposed to return the following year. We got a lot of letters and telegrams asking us to come [from] friends and relatives. So we asked Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche about this and he did divination which said that for the time being things were all right. So we stayed in Lhasa for almost 3 years all together. The golden throne was offered and all those things were done. Then one night some Khambas who were running away from their land came and stayed with us, saying that the situation was now not at all good since they were taking away their weapons. Some of them who had killed a few Chinese cadres had come to our house. They just hid there. Then around that time, the late Nyendra asked for divination and Trijang Rimpoche said that it might be better to leave. So we said that it was better to leave.   

**Q:**  He meant to leave for India, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We didn't have plans to go down, but we couldn't get any passes. At that time, they were taking away the arms and some of them were also killed. Around that time, I don't know whether it was a cannon or what but at night, at the side of our wall, there was a huge explosion. They said that it was a bomb. Everyone was scared and got up and we all said that we should not go out. Nyendrala suspected that they had sent some people to kill him, so one of our servants pretended to go to urinate and quietly climbed to the bathroom roof and said that our whole house was surrounded by soldiers and then we all quietly slept. The ones who had fled [from Kham] were sleeping near the door and when they peeked through the window they said there were Chinese soldiers with guns patrolling. We didn't move. So with such a situation we asked for divination and [Trijang Rimpoche] said it is better to go, so leave soon. I think Nyendrala was meeting with Andru Jinda and all. At that time, without passes they would not allow us to leave. They didn't allow the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> to leave. All of them had been stopped, so the late Nyishaba was also stopped. So Nyishaba went to tell something to the estate manager, Norgye Shidü [Tib. ནོར་རྒྱས་གཞིས་སྡོད] and planned to flee from that place and I and Nyendrala were to apply for passes and leave. It was not easy to get the passes. There was a Chinese official who was said to be kind-hearted and used to give passes. So we said we were from Chamdo and gave false names. We said that we were muleteers and [Nyendrala] said his name was Lobsang Dorji [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ] and we got the passes. Then we left by car that night. We and the children were in one car and the servants in another. We were afraid that we might get caught on the way -- that if they recognized Nyendrala, we would get caught. When we came to the Nathula Pass, there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> who used to be our muleteer. He had gotten together with a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> woman and was living there. We entered his house on the sly and left the car there. He helped us to cross the pass on foot carrying our children on our backs. Then we were relieved.   

**Q:**  When you left Lhasa, had the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> left for Lhoka?   

**A:**  Most probably the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had left for Drigutang because [Nyendrala] said that after he got us [to India] he was going back.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Andru Jinda in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea whether he had left or not. At that time, Nyendrala didn't tell me anything about whether <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had left or not. Then after we arrived here at Kalimpong, he stayed for a while and was saying something about sending medicines [to Lhoka]. The ones who were to take the medicines were sent [via Sikkim] and he left via Bhutan. There the late Prime Minister Jigme Dorji [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ] said that "You guys are going to war and we are friends and so stay for a month." So the late Prime Minister had him there for a month and provided arms to those who did not have them and then [Nyendrala] went to Lhoka. At Lhoka, at Lhagyari, all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> were there and there they assigned various groups over various areas [Tib. དམག་བཀོད་གྱབ]. So it seems that while they were there they did not have arms for fighting. So it was said that Andru Jinda was wounded in the north and there was no use staying like this because they didn't have enough arms and so it was better to try and do something from India. So they had a meeting and they consulted a deity through the oracle and the deity said that Nyendrala and Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. bya rgos rnam rgyal rdo rjr] and Jangtsa [Tib. འཇང་ཚ] Chöndze, I think, should go.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there Gen Legshey?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did they come from Lhoka to India to get arms?   

**A:**  I heard the deity gave a prophecy, so they went ahead with 1-2 servants for each of them [to India]. They crossed over the Magola Pass, I think. They had a lot of problems with snow avalanches. People pulled them out. In India they contacted <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Sawangchemmo and met Indian leaders. Probably they met Nehru. They also met some Goumindang officials. I don't know, but [he said] that there were some Chinese. There were about 6 or so. This was told to me later. He said that they were given 50 each. I don't know if it was dollars or what. Then they were supposed to help and told Nehru and must have contacted the U.S., etc. He told me that he was going to go back in a plane. That they would drop him back there. Then the Dalai Lama left. I don't know where they heard it from but they knew that the Dalai Lama had left. He said that he had to go back. He was very hopeful. I don't know what aid he got or didn't get, but then the Dalai Lama arrived.   

**Q:**  So he did not go back?   

**A:**  No. The Dalai Lama came [to India]. They all went to this place where so many monks died. Was it Missamari?   

**Q:**  So the Dalai Lama came to India, in Missamari.   

**A:**  He came and was brought straight there via Siliguri. Everybody went down to Missamari. So they all went down [Nyendrala too].   

**Q:**  Before 1959 you were in Kalimpong. Gyalo Thondup, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, and Khenjung were there. It seems they had an organization there.   

**A:**  It seems that the new ones who had come from Tibet had some work.   

**Q:**  Later some monk officials came, like Thubden Nyinji [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད].   

**A:**  The three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Kungö, Khenjung, and Nyendrala were also there.   

**Q:**  Later Phünkang and Alo Chöndze, and they didn't get along.   

**A:**  They had their work planned [Tib. རྩོམ་བཞག་ཡོད་རེད]. When the Dalai Lama went to Tibet, the ones who were here had their positions assigned, like Yuthok, Angula, Phünkang Lhajam, Alo Chöndze. These met. Then Shelkar Chandzö. They had their work about which I don't know much. They were doing things well then.   

