# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0061.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 2 February 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 72  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ] is originally from Lhasa from the household called Tsongkhang Sarpa [“New Shop”]. He became a monk in Sera Monastery and then became a chandzö (manager), but was mainly involved in trade in northern Tibet. In this interview, he talks about Chinese policy and the people's attitudes toward the Tibetan government. He also describes the March 10th disturbances and how he went with 993 Sera monks to the Potala to get arms from the government's arsenal and then how he fled via Phembo to Lhoka.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0061_03/H_0061_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Actually, after the Dalai Lama went to China in 1954 and the Chinese kept acting kind of tactfully until 1955-56, right? Did the situation become worse after the war started in Litang and those places and they could no longer stay there so they came up to Lhasa? Or did the situation become worse before that?   

**A:**  There was unrest [Tib. མི་བདེ་བ] in Litang and Amdo area from the year 1949. After that, probably there had been disturbances in those places. But, since the Tibetan Government was located at Central Tibet, the Chinese just acted tactfully in Central Tibet and the Tsang area, i.e., in Ütsang and they used the methods that suited the situation and they didn't use any harsh methods. Actually, from 1955-56 it became definite that the Chinese will do something bad. But, it was like the proverb, "The Chinese are ruined by suspicion and the Tibetans are ruined by hope." [Tib. རྒྱ་དྭོགས་པས་འཕུང་བོད་རེ་བས་འཕུང] The Tibetan always depended on their hopes, thinking that the Chinese might not treat us badly. Even if they planned to treat us badly, there might be a change in the situation and it would be okay. Even now, it is still like this. People are saying that there we will be a change in the situation and we will get the total independence. When I ask them, "What kind of condition do we have to have?" They were saying, "There might be a change in the situation." Actually, it is not the case that there will be a change in the situation if we didn't accept to talk with Chinese and insist on wanting the total independence. And there won't be a change in the situation if we accept to talk with the Chinese and accept not to have a total independence. We are always hoping for something to happen.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama went to China in 1954 and he came back in 1955. Did the situation after that remain the same as during the years 1952-53-54-55?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, many People's Associations were set up, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were many.   

**Q:**  I heard that some people were saying that even when the Tibetans hit the Chinese, they didn't do anything, right?   

**A:**  It didn't happen like this in this place. Probably, at the beginning when the Chinese came, probably such things might have happened in the Kham area. When the Chinese arrived in Ütsang area, the Chinese bullied the Tibetans right away. When people fought with the Chinese, they arrested them and shut them up right away. They never tolerated small defeats for gaining some major advantage.   

**Q:**  In 1956, the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up. Regarding this matter, what kind of remarks or opinions were there in the monastery? Did the monks regard the politics as an important thing and did they talk about that?   

**A:**  In the monastery and in Lhasa City, this was regarded as an important thing. But at that time, people didn't have political experience. When people wanted to contact the people who were in charge of the politics, they were thinking those people might be pro-Chinese and they were unable to judge them. The Chinese were skillful in implementing their policy and made relations with all the kudraks such as those who had many estates like the Depön Midra [Tib. སྡེ་དཔོན་མི་དྲག] and who were capable and verbally powerful and held high positions. Therefore, the people were thinking these kudraks might have been won over by the Chinese by their use of money and that [regular] kudraks also similarly might have been won over by the Chinese. So they didn't find trustworthy persons to talk in detail from the bottom of their hearts like the Tibetan saying, "This is my liver and these are my lungs." [Tib. གློ་བ་འདི་ཡིན་མཆིན་པ་འདི་ཡིན] [This conveys telling everything]. In this way, the people suffered a loss.   

**Q:**  At that time, the people didn't see that the Kashag and the officials were good, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was very difficult [for the people to see that they were good]. At that time, the people fully trusted all of the drunyichemmo and people in the Tsikhang. They didn't trust the Kashag at all because Ngabö signed the 17-Point Agreement and all the people were saying that it was not alright to sign that. Furthermore, the Chinese told the Dalai Lama to appoint Sambo as a kalön. He was called the Chinese Kalön [Tib. རྒྱ་མིའི་བཀའ་བློན]. Tsipön Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] was called the Chinese Tsipön. There wasn't any Chinese drunyichemmo among them. On top of that, Surkhang was cunning and was skilled in fitting [Tib. སྦྱར་མཁས་པོ] to the Chinese side and he was also acting skillfully towards the Tibetans. So the people didn't trust the Kashag at all. Later, when Kungö Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] came to the Kashag, people trusted him. [Note: He was not a kalön, but rather was the Jigyab Khembo]. I am not sure all the people were thinking like this, but the people who had relations with me were thinking in this way. The two sitsab were unquestionably the best [Tib. གོང་ཕུད].   

**Q:**  In 1955-56, didn't they [Chinese] say that the democratic reforms are going to be implemented?   

**A:**  The three great monasteries [Tib. གདན་ས] and the districts and estates all of them got together and made the reforms get delayed for 5 years. It was said that the reforms should be implemented and it is not alright to print Tibetan currency. They said the Tibetan currency will be collected and it will be replaced with Chinese dayan coins. But the [Tibetan] government just kept on printing its own currency and on this matter the great monasteries like Sera and Drepung exerted great strength on it saying that if we are not allowed to print our currency, then the lifeline of the Tibetan Government would be cut off. Some people said, "As for the currency, it is a strange matter. In case, in the future, if China and the Tibetan Governments don't get along well, it would be like in the past in Outer Mongolia when a full cart of the Mongolian currency couldn't even buy one egg." As for the answer to this matter, some people said, "At that time, they didn't have any choice but to do that. Even if we couldn't buy an egg with a cart full of Tibetan currency, that would be like the proverb, "When the country is covered with water, stones cannot remain dry." [Tib. ལུང་པ་ཆུས་འཇིག་ན་རྡོ་ལེབ་སྐམ་པོ་ལུས་མི་སྲིད]. But when they are going to cut off the life line before people die, we can't take it."   

**Q:**  In 1956, when the Youth League and the Women's Association were set up and when they were talking about socialism, did they go to the countryside?   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  Some people said at that time, they were showing movies and Chinese operas, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  Where were you staying in 1954-55-56?   

**A:**  I used to go to the north for trading in summer and I used to stay in the monastery and home during the winter.   

**Q:**  What kind of differences were there regarding the horse corvée and the pack animal transportation corvée after the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  There wasn't any change to that. We were travelling in the areas that belonged to the Tibetan Government. In some areas of Kham that used to belong to the Tibetan Government, people said that the time of imposing horse corvée taxes are over and they stopped working as a tax for the Tibetan Government. There was a dzong called Gyeltön Dzong [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྟོན་རྫོང] and a monk official called Wöse Bumther [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་འབུམ་ཐེར] (who later died in Switzerland) was sent there as the district head during the time of the sitsab. When he came back, it was said that he had accomplished his duty and he was promoted as to be a tsendrön [aide in the Dalai Lama's Secretariat].   

**Q:**  Where was that district located?   

**A:**  That was located at Gyeltön in Kham.   

**Q:**  In 1956, when the Dalai Lama went to India, where were you staying?   

**A:**  I was doing the same trading as I mentioned above.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama went to India in winter, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What happened at that time in Lhasa?   

**A:**  At that time, people were very glad when the Dalai Lama went to India and people thought that he won't come back and if so, it would become easy to do the work and the work would be effective [Tib. ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ]. When the days passed by, and we heard that the Dalai Lama was going to come back the people felt kind of worried thinking that if the Dalai Lama came back, then it would be finished and there might be a mishap. All people felt unsafe.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you talk mainly with the people in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. In the monastery. And I also talked with some traders in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you talk about politics with them?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. I talked with my teacher and Jayan Dawa and those leaders of the Water Dragon People's Association.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Khambas come in 1956-57 after it was said that they were going to implement the forced reforms?   

**A:**  The forced reforms were kind of started from 1955-56 in the Kham and Amdo areas. But, in central Tibet, the Chinese had been using [some kind of other] methods until 1959.   

**Q:**  At that time, did a large number of people come?   

**A:**  It wasn't a large number of people. Probably, I guess, the people who came were those people who were thoughtful people and who had made the determination to come up thinking that they could do something here.   

**Q:**  Before that, there might be many Khambas staying in the monastery and doing trading?   

**A:**  Yes. There were many who came to the monastery to study dialectics and some of them passed the Geshe degree and some of them passed the Rigchung [Tib. རིག་ཆུང] which was equal to the 10th grade and then went back to their homeland. There were also some Khamba traders staying in Lhasa for a couple of years and then went back.   

**Q:**  I heard from some people that at that time the Chinese were paying great attention to the Khambas. So it was hard for them to stay in Lhasa. Once many Chinese were arrested at night and they were sent back to China. So At that time, probably, they [Khambas] also thought that they might be arrested, right?   

**A:**  It is possible that they might have thought like this. I knew a lot of Khambas, but they weren't suspicious of that.   

**Q:**  Some people said that when the Dalai Lama was in India, the Chinese acted kind of very tense like building bunkers and the soldiers were going hither and thither and they were preparing [for war].   

**A:**  Yes, that was right. They did more preparations. The people living in Lhasa were also kind of relaxed when the Dalai Lama was staying in India and people were kind of happy. When the Dalai Lama came back the people were a little bit down in spirits.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama came back, the Chinese wanted the Tibetan Government to end the Khamba's disturbance and at first they sent Mengyiling [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང] to Lhoka, but when he talked with the Khambas it didn't work out and he came back. Later, the big meeting was held and they said that Namseling was one of the main persons in the Chushigandru and the Chinese insisted on saying that Namseling has to go to end the Khamba's disturbance. Probably, before that some abbots from the three great monasteries also went to Lhoka, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, I also heard that before they were sent, the Tibetan Government officials held some sub-group team discussions during the Assembly meeting. Did you hear anything in the monastery regarding the Assembly meetings or the team discussions?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard about that. I heard that the Khambas were causing disturbances against the Chinese, so the Local Government should take action to end disturbance and the Local Government had to bear all the responsibilities for this. At that time, the Chinese were blaming the Tibetan Government, so Namseling and Trekhang Khenjung pretended [Tib. ཁུལ] to go to talk with the Khambas.   

**Q:**  Were there any different opinions in the monastery regarding this matter? Or most of the people were not attentive about such political matters?   

**A:**  They were very attentive and some people were also preparing to go [as volunteers] from the monastery. But, as I told you yesterday, we were told not to go. At that time in Lhasa people sang a song with the wording, "Andru Gombo Tashi went to Tsetang. You, the protective deity Namseling! Please give [him] a good prophecy [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས། རྩེད་ཐང་གཞུང་ལ་ཕེབས་སོང། ཆོས་སྐྱོང་རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང་པ། ལུང་བསྟན་ཡག་པོ་སྐྱོན་རོགས]. This implied that Namseling was giving instructions to Andru.   

**Q:**  I heard that at the time of the Mönlam festival in 1956 a kind of flyer was thrown and many monks were holding the document and coming to the Mönlam, right?   

**A:**  At that time, I didn't attend the [prayer] assembly, but when the morning assembly [Tib. ཞོགས་ཚོགས] was held at around 4 a.m., the monks of three great monasteries were assembled in the inner Barkor of the Jokhang and most of them were from Sera and Ganden. There were two Barkors in Lhasa, the inner and the outer. When they came to the assembly, probably, there were quite a number of documents that had been thrown in the inner Barkor and it was thrown outside. So the monks took the documents. After that, when they ]Chinese] inquired about that, some of the monks were arrested. One of the monks was called Jolo. He is still here in the old people's home and now he lost his hearing and he has become like an idiot. He used to be a dobdo [Tib. རྡོབ་རྡོབ] monk in Sera Monastery who was said to brave. He was one of the monks that were arrested at that time. I don't have any idea from where the document came, but it was indeed distributed at that time.   

**Q:**  At the time of the revolt in 1958-59, were you in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, how did you hear about that?   

**A:**  I was in the monastery when some of the monks of the monastery were coming back from Lhasa. At that time, I was the caretaker of the assembly hall. Some of the monks like Chandzö Olo [Tib. ཨོ་ལོ] who is now in the old people's home, the house manager [Tib. ཁང་གཉེར] of Tratsang Jey [Tib. བྱེས] called by the nickname "Good Morning." They were kind of agitated [Tib. ཕུ་ཤོར་ཤོར] and said, "Somebody was delivering a message saying that all of the people should come to Norbulinga. What is that for? I told them, "Why are you asking me instead of asking the person who delivered the message." They said, "You are a person who hears a lot, so we thought that you might know something, so we are asking you about this." Then I told them, "We shouldn't remain like this. Like the proverb, "Amount of snows that has fallen on big and small stones." [Tib. རྡོ་ཆེ་ཆུང་གི་ཁ་བ] we also have an obligation to do something according our own condition. So what shall we do?" At that time, the house manager of the Tratsang Jey College said, "How about sending a person down there?" I said, "Some of us should go down there and listen to the people to see what they are talking about." We talked until late night, but couldn't make a decision. Finally, we decided to go early morning on the next day. There was a monk called Senge [Tib. སེང་གེ] who used to be the Simgag monk bodyguard of Matrül Rimpoche [Tib. མ་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. I said that it would be better if we send Senge because he is brave and enthusiastic. Then we called him and sent him to Norbulinga. When he came back he said, "Many things happened in Norbulinga, and Chamdo Khenjung was killed. The area around Norbulinga was so filled with monk and lay people that I couldn't find a way to walk through it. Sambo was also stoned when he came to Norbulinga and his head was wounded but then the driver drove the car back and ran away. Ngabö was supposed to come to Norbulinga, but he went to the Military Headquarter [Ch. si ling bu]. I just heard about that. I didn't see him going." When Senge went to Lhasa, he saw that all people were going to Norbulinga, so he also went to Norbulinga because the message that was delivered to the people said to come to Norbulinga although he didn't know who delivered the message. So he saw that Chamdo Khenjung was stoned.   

**Q:**  What did you do after that? Were you still in the monastery?   

**A:**  I was the caretaker of the assembly hall. After that, the monk officials who were in charge of the College went down there and asked for weapons and each College was given fifty 303 English Carbines. Ganden Monastery especially was given some more guns because the monastery was located at a very long distance. Altogether, they gave 150 rifles for Sera Monastery and 200 rifles for Drepung Monastery. I don't remember clearly. Then we were talking saying that this amount of weapon can't do anything. Sera Mey college probably had about 15-20 guns and they distributed the guns to the monks. After that, meetings were held in Norbulinga and in Shöl and they also might have held meetings in Kundeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང]. At that time, the abbots of the monastery went to Norbulinga. So we couldn't make any decisions in the monastery, but we were just holding some meetings. At that time, we were just talking about fighting. Nobody could make the resolution regarding what shall we do if we lose the war or what shall we do if we win the victory, but all were determined to fight.   

**Q:**  I heard that many monks of Sera went to take out guns, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Those were the monks of Sera. When we went to Potala Palace from Sera [to get the government's guns stored there]. 993 monks went.   

**Q:**  Did you take the guns from the arsenal [Tib. གོ་མཛོད]?   

**A:**  Yes, the guns were stored in a storeroom under the Red Palace [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་དམར་པོ]. At first, when we went to the Potala Palace, they didn't give the guns from that arsenal. I don't know from where they got the guns. They just brought some old English Carbines with long barrels. At that time, they were doing according to the old custom and wrote the number of the guns and the names of the all the monks, along with their college and residence hall affiliations, and also their teacher(s). At that time, they [Chinese and the Tibetans] were firing cannons each other, but they were still making the notes about the weapon recipients. So it seemed that they couldn't finish making the notes and the monks were very aggressive. At that time, distributing the weapons were the fourth rank officials; Rimshi Sumdo [Tib. རིམ་བཞི་སུམ་མདོ], Shagjang [Tib. ཤག་བྱང] and Khenjung Thubden Lengmön [Tib. མཁན་ཆུང་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན]. There was a monk called Atsa who is now in Darjeeling to whom Chandzö Olo said, "We should just kill Thubden Lengmön as he is the person who had been doing all bad things [Tib. གྲ་མ་འགྲིག] from the beginning to the end." He was a very powerful person during the Regent Taktra when he was a nendrön [aide]. So they were thinking that he was the person who taught Sera the lesson through harsh means [Tib. བཟོ་ཏ་བཟོ]. And at that time, when he was distributing the guns, he was showing an appearance of making a big deal of it [Tib. འགན་ལྗིད་མདོག་ཁ་པོ]. The Chinese were shooting our ass, so how could he act like that at this battlefield." Some of the monks said, "We shouldn't do that. It would be like the like the war of Sera Jey. When the war of Sera Jey started, they killed the abbot. So that didn't work out well. Tseja Thubden Lengmön is a celebrate person [as a monk official], so it would be very bad if a celebrate person would kill another celebrate person. At first, we should teach the Chinese a lesson. It would be easy to teach Thubden Lengmön a lesson." Later, the monks told the officials something and then they took the key of the arsenal opened the door. In there weren't number on the guns and some of the monks took 2 or 3 guns and all of the monks took at least one gun. After getting the guns, we didn't get the ammunition because it was stored under the Sharchenjog [Tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོག] prison and the distance between the place where the guns were stored and where the ammunition was stored was far. The policy was not well made and it caused the people to have a hard time. When we went to get the ammunition from Deyangshar [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས་ཤར] to Sharchenjog, we had to have volunteers to go there. At that time, 2-3 monks rushed over there.   

**Q:**  At that time, the war was still going on and they were firing guns, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When we came through Tsesumtang [Tib. ཚེས་གསུམ་ཐང] to the Potala Palace, many monks were shot dead on the way and when we went back to the monastery, many monks were also killed.   

**Q:**  Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  I had to stay in the monastery because I was the caretaker of the assembly hall. According to Tibetan custom, the caretaker had a great responsibility.   

**Q:**  You spent most of your time in the monastery during the revolt, right?   

**A:**  Yes, all of the monks came back to the monastery except a few monks who were in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I heard that at that time, the Women's Association was set up. What were they doing?   

**A:**  I heard that on the day when Chamdo Khenjung was killed and Sambo was stoned, Gurteng Künsang [Tib. གུར་སྟེང་ཀུན་བཟང] said, "You, the men should stay behind. We, the women will go ahead and we are going to lay down under the car which is coming to invite the Dalai Lama. We are going to sacrifice our lives." At that time, quite a lot of women had gathered there and all of them decided to do that. After that, when Sambo came down, he had the problem. Ngabö had to go there [to the Chinese Military Headquarter] and Surkhang was able to get into Norbulinga. So the Chinese couldn't invite the Dalai Lama on time. Two or three days after that, on the 10th, the main war took place and probably on the 12th the Women's Association gathered in the Barkor Street and shouted the slogan, "Tibet is independent." At that time, I was not in Lhasa. At that time, I had already arrived in Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ].   

**Q:**  You had already left when you were in the monastery, right?   

**A:**  After we came back from Potala to the monastery, a message was delivered in the monastery. We didn't know who sent the message but it said that all the capable people [Tib. ཧྲག་ཧྲག] who had weapons should come to Nyangrelnang [Tib. མྱང་རལ་ནང]. When we got to Nyangrelnang, it was dark at night.   

**Q:**  Why did you go to Nyangrelnang?   

**A:**  All of the people were going there. When we got there, there wasn't anybody to lead the people.   

**Q:**  Why did they call the people to go there?   

**A:**  They implied that they had something to talk about like saying that tomorrow people should come to Norbulinga. It was also understood that it was for fighting because they said that all the capable monks who have weapons should come to Nyangrelnang. When we got there, there wasn't anybody making arrangements or leading the people. So we just went to Phembo. At that time, the Chinese were firing machine guns from airplanes and we also saw the plane go to Lhasa. Later, when we arrived at Lhoka, the plane also came there.   

**Q:**  Where did you go from Phembo?   

**A:**  We went from the upper part of Phembo to the lower part of the Phembo and then we crossed the mountain pass in Ganden and went to Lhoka through Gyamanang [Tib. རྒྱ་མའི་ནང].   

**Q:**  Which part of the Lhoka did you go to?   

**A:**  I went to Wön [Tib. འོན] through the Lukhang [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང] ferry site.   

**Q:**  When you arrived at Lhoka, did the people get prepared for something to happen? What did they hear at that time? There were also Chushigandru near to those people, right?.   

**A:**  At that time, Chushigandru and the people in Lhoka were not getting along well. In Wön, there was a ledrung (clerk) called Tamdrin [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན] who was related to Kungö Trekhang. I had a very good yellowish horse that I had bought from the ledrung. When we arrived at Wön, it was dark and snowing so we didn't know the way to the Ledrung's house so I told my partners, "If I keep my horse's rein lose, it will lead us to his house." After that, my horse led us to his house that night and we stayed there overnight. There were 12-13 monks with me and the clerk wanted us to stay there saying, "The Khambas are bullying us [Tib. བརྙས་བརྐོ] and they aren't leaving us alone." At first, I agreed to stay there, but later when all the people were crossing the river, we couldn't risk staying there, so I told the ledrung, "First, all the people are crossing the river, so we can't risk staying here. Second, you, the people in this area are not planning to make war. You are just looking at the situation and you are not planning to help us. It doesn't seems that you think the war was being made for the country. It seems you are thinking that the war is being made against us and you didn't have anything to do with it." Then the ledrung said, "I will tell you this, but don't tell anybody. We are thinking that it would be better if Chushigandru would not win the war, because they were bullying us so severely that the way that the kudrak bullied the people in the past seems like playing around. Chushigandru has robbed money, corals, turquoise, amber, pearls, horses and even women. So the people will not help them in making war. When they force us to send people, we have no choice but to go. Nobody dared to say no, but we definitely won't go voluntarily." When I heard this I became quite down in spirit. If all the people in that area have the same pain [in their minds] like the clerk, we won't be able to get through this. The people in Lhoka were not going to help us at all.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Chushigandru had set up their salary office and Namseling and those people also had set up something.   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  After that, where did you go?   

**A:**  Then we came to Yarlung Phodrang [Tib. ཡར་ཀླུངས་ཕོ་བྲང] where the main office of the Chushigandru was located and Namseling was also there. We didn't stay at Phodrang. We stayed in Trandrug [Tib. ཁྲ་འབྲུག] where there was an estate belonged to Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] and we went to Phodrang in day time and came back at night. We stayed there for 3-4 days. After that, Namseling and Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] told me, "You, Chandzöla should better come with us." I said, "I am not going to come with the two of you because we have an eating commune [Tib. ལྟོ་ཤོག]. If we are not going to fight again, it won't work out if I just stayed with you and amused you Kungö to pass the time [Tib. དབུ་འཁོར་ཞུ]." They just said yes. After that, we divided the places [to guard] by drawing lots at around 6-7 p.m. and we, the monks from Sera were to go to Wölga [Tib. འོལ་དགའ]. We had to get prepared on the next day and then we were going to Wölga on the day after. The night just before going to Wölga, Tsetang was lost.   

**Q:**  Did you plan to stay there and fight ?   

**A:**  Yes, we planned to fight and we were going to guard [Tib. ས་སྲུང] Wölga.   

**Q:**  I heard that Namseling and those people conscripted soldiers in Yarlung Phodrang, right?   

**A:**  They conscripted, but the soldiers were unable to gather together. They didn't have the time to do that.   

**Q:**  Did you, the monks of Sera accepted to go in there ?   

**A:**  Yes, all of us accepted to go. At that time, most of the monks from Sera had guns and they were capable [Tib. ཧྲག་པོ] because all of us were the monks that had been to the Potala Palace and we had weapons. There were a lot of monks from Ganden and Drepung who didn't have weapons. The monks from Sera had a lot of weapons because we went to the Potala Palace.   

**Q:**  Then Tsetang was lost, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was lost on that night.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  On that night, Namseling and Samjola had already left for Chödegön [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་གོང] and they were staying there. When we arrived at Chödegön, they had already left from that place. At that time, we just stopped for a meal at Chödegön and we felt very cold and there were people from Chushigandru and the monks from Sera, Drepung and Ganden. At that time, the leaders of the Chushigandru went through the motions of giving the people something [food] but they didn't have enough to give because there were too many people. We had some food and tea bricks with us. Chushigandru said, "People who have weapons are not allowed to leave. In case, you want to leave, you have to hand over the weapons to Chushigandru." At that time, the monks were talking to each other, "If we hand over the weapons to them, they don't have [other] people so what are they going to do with the weapons. So we shouldn't hand over the weapons to them. If they would fight a battle, it would be good. But we don't know how they are going to fight. So we have to inquire about that." In the evening, they were preparing to leave and they were not planning to fight. Then we crossed the Yartö Dragla [Tib. ཡར་སྟོད་བྲག་ལ] mountain pass and on the next day we heard that the Chushigandru had fought a battle in Yartö Dragla, but there were too many Chinese and too few Tibetans, so it didn't work out. When we came up from Yartö Dragla, the soldiers of the Trapchi Regiment and the Commander Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] were staying in a shepherd's enclosure on the other side of the mountain pass. We met one of the soldiers of the Trapchi Regiment called Wangyal [Tib. དབང་རྒྱལ] on the top of the mountain pass. In the past, he used to play a lot of mahjong. When I asked him, "Where are you going?" He said, "Kungö Depön [Commander] told me to go to watch to the other side. He is with some of the soldiers down there." I told him there is nothing to watch over there. If you are not well prepared, the war is not like the wars in the Gesar Story. It is not enough to have 2-3-4-5-6-10-15 brave people. It won't work out if we don't organize people together [Tib. དཔུང་སྒྲིག]. I told him. "Where is your depön?" He said, "He is down there. Then I told him, "Let's go down together." However, he said that he had to go to watch on the other side of the mountain. Then I didn't go to see Tashi Bera. I just a send a person there. He came back and said that Tashi Bera told him, "You people shouldn't leave like this. You have good weapons. You can stop them [Chinese], so you should stay here." There was a monk called Nyendra [Tib. སྙན་གྲགས] among us. He told the depön, "Even if we could stop the Chinese, this is not the way of stopping the Chinese. If we are going to stop the Chinese, we should either go up the mountain or go further and hold a safe place. Otherwise, it won't work out if we just wait for the Chinese at the bottom of the mountain pass." Then the depön said, "Let's go further. You monks go ahead and we will follow you. After that, we didn't go downwards thinking that if the Chinese were on the mountain pass, we would suffer a serious loss. We thought that if we go along the middle part or the waist of the mountain, it would be a little bit better. After that, a monk came along saying the depön is about to leave and then we traveled the whole night. When the day broke, we arrived at the place where the estate of Somphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད] was located. In that place, the people who had arrived there held a meeting in Somphü and it was said that we have to go up to Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ] so we went to Lhüntse. We heard that the Dalai Lama had arrived in India with seven of his attendants including the attendants in charge of serving food, in charge of the ritual offering and in charge of his clothing of the Dalai Lama [Tib. གསོལ་གཟིམ་མཆོད་གསུམ]. When we heard that, all of us were relaxed because the Dalai Lama had left. Then they were not planning to fight and they were planning to leave. They were just verbally fighting, but not doing any thing like staying there to fight a battle. After that, two of the kungös left and we stayed behind. After that, we held a meeting until 1-2 a.m. at night and we divided up the places. In the Chushigandru, there were groups from different areas in Kham. We came from the different great monasteries. On the next day, the military salary was paid and places were divided and it was decided to go to guard the places that were divided to the groups. It was decided that they will deliver a message on the next day. On the next morning, nobody was delivering messages. At that time, we had about 20 people and Nyendra was with us. Then we decided to send Chanzdö Wangla [Tib. དབང་ལགས] and Chöndze Sugu [Tib. སུ་གུ] to the Drag Monastery to see whether Andru [Gombo Tashi] is there or not. Two of them had good horses, so we sent them. If Andru was not there, then there was no use for us to stay here. At that time, Andru was supposed to be the main person who was making the strategies. We told the two of them to look carefully whether Andru is there or not. There might be guards outside and they might tell you that Jinda [Gombo Tashi] is inside. But you should look whether Andru's white horse and the red horse are in the stable or not. If you could go inside, then it will be okay. The two of them left and it was a quite a long distance. When the two of them came back, they said that Andru had already left. Then we asked who else was there. They said Kharchen Chandzö [Tib. མཁར་ཆེན་ཕྱག་མཛོད], Chandzö Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད་བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས], Bisu Jola, and Hor Tembai Gyentsen [Tib. ཧོར་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན] were there. Anyway, they said that there were several important people and they [the Khambas] told the two them, "You, the monks of Sera are assigned as the soldiers of the ammunition dump. We are coming up there and the two of you should follow us." And they gave us this certificate. When we looked from the roof of the house, we saw the Khambas were coming with the horses and mules. They had loaded the horses and mules with ammunition. After they arrived there, I asked Chandzö Lobsang Yeshe who is from the same College as me, "Is there any possibility of fighting a battle?" He said, "It is very hard to say. It won't be alright if we didn't fight, but probably the preparations are not going to be good because everyone has become nervous." Then we went to the place called Mago [pass] and we saw a pile of things thrown in the snow. Later, we knew that those things were thrown by the Khenjung and the Tsipön [Namseling and Samjola]. They had taken a lot of things from a rich labrang [Tib. བླ་བྲང] in Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར] and later left the things over there and the people in that area were grabbing the things. We also held a meeting in Mago and decided to go back and send people again to guard the places. At that time, we saw ten some Indian soldiers near that place. They looked poor and the houses were also not good. After that, we had to go to India. Then we arrived at Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] and they still held a meeting, but I said that I am not going to attend the meeting. I was also sick at that time because I came along hungry and the people in Mön gave us the black grapes and we ate a lot so I had diarrhea. They still held meetings for three days in Tawang saying that they are going to fight. After that, [talking about] fighting vanished.   

