# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0061.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1 February 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 72  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ] is originally from Lhasa from the household called Tsongkhang Sarpa [“New Shop”]. He became a monk in Sera Monastery and then became a chandzö (manager), but was mainly involved in trade in northern Tibet. In this interview, he continues (from Part 1) to discuss how the Water Dragon People's Association still acted as an organization after it was officially banned, how they searched for foreign aid through Jenkhentsisum, and how the Tsangtö People's Association led by Bisu made connections with them. He also tells how Alo Chöndze and Jayan Dawa went to India together, but didn't get along well because Alo Chöndze wanted to use government gold and silver to buy arms, but Jenkhentsisum disagreed. The interviewee also describes how, in 1958, he planned to go to Lhoka with 43 tough monk volunteers from Sera Mey College, but was discouraged from going to volunteer. He also talks about the rapid increase of prices after the Chinese arrived in Lhasa and how the trade in wool was curtailed by a US ban, but how trade with India for the Chinese soared.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0061_02/H_0061_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  At that time, the People's Association was set up and then the Tibetan Government issued an edict saying that the People's Association is not allowed to hold meetings, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, did the People's Association became kind of become eliminated?   

**A:**  Soon after that, Chandzö Thamjö Sonam died. But Jayan Dawa, Gomang Drubto, my teacher, Tongsum Joglag and Kamekang Chöndze still held the organization and they mobilized the people saying that if we remain under the Chinese, we would be unable to lead our life. So we have to do something. As for making war, we had already made a fool of ourselves [Tib. བྱབས་བསྐྱལ] and the Chinese had already arrived. So we [said] we have to and we have to do something to make relations and seek the support of foreign countries. They had hopes on the organization in Kalimpong which had the three main people [Tib. Jenkhentsisum]. After that, Alo Chöndze also set up an organization. They also had placed their hope on that organization.   

**Q:**  This was after 1-2-3 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were still holding on to the Water Dragon People's Association.   

**Q:**  In 1952, the Tibetan Government told them that they are not allowed to assemble, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but they still held on to the organization. Before that, there were many people in the organization, but since then they didn't keep on making relations with so many people, but they still kept their relations with few trustworthy people.   

**Q:**  Did they have relations with the people in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  At that time in Kalimpong, there was an ex-monk official called Muru Ta lama Shabsur. They had relations with that person. I heard something about that person having relations with Gyalo Thondup, Tsipön Shakabpa and the Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen. But I didn't hear clearly about this. My teacher told me about how we needed somebody in Kalimpong to rest our hope on. At that time, among the aristocrats, Shakabpa and Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen were regarded as trustworthy people by people like my teacher.   

**Q:**  After that, what kind of organizations or groups [Tib. ཚོགས་པ] were there in Lhasa in the years 1956-57-58?   

**A:**  In 1954, there was an association of people in central and western Tibet called the Tsangtö Mimang [Tib. གཙང་སྟོད་མི་དམང] or the Tsangtö [Tsang-West Tibet] People's Association. Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་བ] and Shelkar [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར] Chandzö who was from Sera Mey College, set up this association. At that time, the Tsangtö People's Association was making relations with the leaders of the Water Dragon People's Association. After that, Alo Chöndze, Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག] Shigatse Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག] also set up an association to oppose the Chinese which was quite strong. But since we were under the control of the Chinese we couldn't cope with them. It was like the proverb, "The finger can't poke the sky." [Tib. མཛུ་གུས་གནམ་མ་འཕིག] because the opponent was very powerful. After that, there were [two people], Chandzö Lobsang Dorje [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ] and Ganden Lobsang Dawa [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཟླ་བ], I am not sure whether he [the latter] was from Shartse [Tib. ཤར་རྩེ] or Changtse [Tib. བྱང་རྩེ] College. Later he was killed in Kalimpong but we don't know who killed him.   

**Q:**  Was he the person with the goiter?   

**A:**  Yes, he was regarded as quite a tough person. The two of them came to India. After that, Alo Chöndze was arrested and afterwards he was released under the guarantee of the three great monasteries -- Sera, Drepung and Ganden. that Alo Chöndze will not get involve in political matters [in the future]. Among the three monasteries, Drepung Loseling, Sera Mey, Drepung Bombora put their common seals on the guarantee letter. Alo Chöndze and Jayan Dawa went to India and it became like the two associations merged together. After they came to India, Alo Chöndze and Jayan Dawa didn't get along well. Before they left from Lhasa, Alo Chöndze told Jayan Dawa, "You just try to get the food and the expenses that will be enough from Lhasa to Kalimpong. After we arrive there, I have my own house and money in the bank." He told him a lot about having many things in India. Jayan Dawa was a patriotic and he believed this was true so he sold all of his valuable things. He had two English Carbines with the long barrel [Tib. དབྱིན་ཇི་ཁ་རིང] and two Japanese long rifles [Tib. རི་པིན་ལྕགས་ཤུབས] and one short rifle [Tib. ལྕགས་རྒྱུག]. He asked me to buy the guns and said he will sell them cheap. I bought them. Two of the English Carbines used to belong to the Tibetan Government, they had Tibetan numbers on them. I don't remember the price. At that time, I asked him what are you up to? He said, "I will tell you later." Then he said, "It is like the proverb, "When I show you the corner, you will see the whole thing." [Tib. ཟུར་བསྟན་ལེབ་མཐོང]. Actually, I am leaving. I don't need to tell you clearly, you will know that. Don't tell anybody because we had the experience about that." My teacher told me to buy the guns and I told them that I am going to buy them. After that, the two of them went to India via Lhoka and Bhutan. We knew about that only long after they had arrived at Kalimpong. I was sure that they were going to India and I thought that they might have a great plan and I had a great hope on them. I heard from Jayan Dawa in 1959 that Alo Chöndze [actually] didn't have anything in Kalimpong when they arrived there. At that time, Jayan Dawa had lost his celibacy and he told me about that one evening while he was drinking beer. He said that they promised not to talk about the common cause of Tibet until we reached Kalimpong. The Chinese could arrest us on the way. If we would be arrested, we will say that we are going for a pilgrimage. We never had the thought of going abroad to Kalimpong. But, when Alo Chöndze arrived at Lhoka, he started bragging recklessly saying that we are the representatives of the Tibetan people. From that point on, they didn't get along well a little bit. When they arrived at Kalimpong, he saw that Alo Chöndze didn't have anything in Kalimpong. Jayan Dawa had a little bit of a relationship with Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen from Tibet. The two of them were not from the same tratsang (college). Khenjung was from Gomang and Jayan Dawa was from Loseling. But they had relations when they were doing some trading. He also had relations with Shakabpa. When the two of them were talking, Alo Chöndze told Jayan Dawa, "The first thing we should do is to sell the gold and silver which is left in Gangtok and buy weapons. The Volunteer Army to Defend Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླང་དམག] or the Chushigandru is in Lhoka, but they didn't have weapons. We should report this to Jenkhentsisum and we have to do that." At that time, in Kalimpong it had become kind of the two organizations, the upper one and the lower one [Tib. གྲོས་ཚོགས་གོང་འོག]. The three of them were in the inner circle. In the lower level there was Chandzö Lobsang Dorje, Lobsang Dawa, Gyetong, Kungö Wangdü, Thubden Nyinji, and Kungö Champa Tsündrü. Three of these Kungö were the three monk officials who had fled for India surreptitiously. At that time, Jayan Dawa told Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen clearly, "Alo Chöndze is not doing good at all and is planning to sell the gold and the silver in Gangtok. Alo Chöndze is an aggressive person, so it is very important for you kungös to talk nicely so that Alo Chöndze will not get agitated. Anyway, if someone touches the gold and the silver in Gangtok, this is definitely not alright." Jayan Dawa lived together with Khenjung in the house called Ganden Villa. Jayan Dawa was living on the first floor. After that, Alo Chöndze talked with the kungös about the gold and silver and they didn't agree to that. Therefore, Alo Chöndze was extremely agitated. At that time, Alo Chöndze was already in a situation that he couldn't manage himself [Tib. ཁུངས་མ་འཁྱོལ].   

**Q:**  I heard that at the beginning there were the Jenkhentsisum and later many people came in 1956 like Kalön Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག], Phünkang Lhajam [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ལྷ་ལྕམ], and Drunyichemmo Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས]. I heard that Phünkang Lhajam and Alo Chöndze and probably Kalön Yuthok were on one side and didn't get along well with Jenkhentsisum.   

**A:**  That's right.   

**Q:**  Was that because of the silver?   

**A:**  Probably. it was like this. Lobsang Dawa and Chandzö Lobsang Dorje were also on Phünkang Lhajam's side. At that time, Phünkang Lhajam was very close to Chandzö Lobsang Dorje. Something happened [Tib. གཅིག་བྱས་སོང] to Lobsang Dawa in 1959-60. I don't remember clearly. In the beginning [after arriving in exile], Phünkang Lhajam came to Mussoorie and she brought many Tibetan people to work on the roads. At that time, Phünkang Lhajam said something inappropriate [Tib. སྐྱོ་པོ] saying, "I will not accept anybody for the leader of the road building except Ragashag [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] or Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen.   

**Q:**  I heard that after the People's Association held in the Water Dragon year was finished in 1952, Phala Drönyerchemmo also had an association or a group [Tib. ཚོགས་པ]. Some people said that Namseling talked with the monasteries and tried to get Alo Chöndze released.   

**A:**  I am not sure about this. It is possible because there is a reason for him to do that. at that time I also used to have this suspicion. At that time, Namseling and Drunyichemmo Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] were in the Standing Committee of the Reform Office [Tib. Legjö Legung]. Among the members of the Standing Committee there were the representatives from the 9 tratsang (colleges) of Sera, Drepung and Ganden monasteries. So they put their strength on it and got Alo Chöndze out of the jail. Probably, they [Namseling] beat the drum and let them act.   

**Q:**  I also heard that Namseling was working with Drönyerchemmo [Phala]?   

**A:**  This is also possible. I was the caretaker of the assembly hall [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་དཀོན་གཉེར] of Sera Monastery at the time when Tibet was lost. Probably in 1958, we had 43 tough fighters from Sera Mey College who planned to go [to fight] as volunteer soldiers. So I had to ask for leave from the caretaker. The caretaker of the assembly hall was appointed by the Tibetan Government and was approved by the Dalai Lama. It has a quite a high rank. At that time, one of the representatives of the Legjö office from Sera Mey was called Kungö Lobsang Phüntso. He was from Drigung Labrang. The two of us had a close relationship and he also had close relations with my family, so I asked him, "We are planning to go as volunteer soldiers, what shall we do? I also have to ask for leave from the caretaker. He said, "If you are going, you had better leave surreptitiously. It would be useless to ask for leave. But hold off for a couple of days. I will ask Namseling and Bumtang. We also talked about this in the Legjö Office saying that we don't feel at ease if everyone goes to Lhoka." After about 10-15 days, Lobsang Phüntso had come to my home in Lhasa, however I missed meeting him because I went to play mahjong. Later, I heard that he came to the monastery and I went to see him. He said, "You shouldn't go. It won't work out if you go. I asked about this to many important persons. Especially Namseling doesn't agree to this." I asked him, "Why". He said, "Namseling said that if all of the tough fighters would go out, if something happened inside here, we can't bear the responsibility. You people should get together and get ready, but you shouldn't leave and go out. Because many people went from the three monasteries and from the regiments It is enough and there are many people in Lhoka." So it was clear about what you asked me now. I didn't know that Drönyerchemmo was involved in that, but Namseling and Bumtang were hundred percent involved and it seemed that they were talking with the representatives of the three monasteries on that matter.   

**Q:**  In 1952, Ngawang Senge [Tib. ངང་དབང་སེང་གེ] and Ngawang Thöndrub, three of the monk officials went to China. Did they just go for study or were they doing any kind of secret things?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time Lobsang Yeshe, Ngawang Thöndrub, the monk official nicknamed, "yellow ball" Seril la [Tib. སེར་རིལ་ལགས] [real name is Lobsang Tenzin [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་འཛིན]], and Yeshe Yönden [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡོན་ཏན] -- there were five of them [who went]. Probably one of them was nicknamed "stingy" Jagril la. They went to China to study in 1952. At that time, probably the late Lobsang Yeshe had the thought of opposing the Chinese after learning the Chinese characters and the spoken language. If we didn't know the language, we would not be able to oppose them. He was thinking that if we knew the language then we could oppose the Chinese through military or peaceful means and the path would become kind of smooth.   

**Q:**  I heard that they opposed down there.   

**A:**  I just heard about that and I don't have anything to tell you in detail. I heard that at that time one of the dzasa of the Panchen Lama took Lobsang Yeshe back to Tibet. Otherwise, they [Chinese] might have done something to him in China. Regarding this matter, Samdru [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ] has the details to tell you.   

**Q:**  I also heard about the Tashilhunpo.   

**A:**  Yes. He was able to make friends with one of the dzasa of Tashilhunpo and he was able to come back. Otherwise, he was in a dangerous situation.   

**Q:**  How was the situation in Lhasa in 1953? In 1951, a large number of Chinese came to Tibet. In 1952, the Water Dragon People's Association was set up. At that time, didn't the prices of the foodstuffs increase rapidly?   

**A:**  Yes, it increased rapidly. Before the Chinese arrival, a khe of barley cost 15 sang. After the Chinese arrived a khe of barley cost 4 dotse [200 sang].   

**Q:**  Was that in 1959?   

**A:**  It was in 1958-59.   

**Q:**  The poor people had a very hard time, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a very hard time. The people who were able to work could get a job. But people who were unable to work had a very hard time.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chinese also set up the Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ] and the Women's Association [Tib. བུད་མེད་ཚོགས་པ] and there were many kudrak who went to plant trees, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the thinking about this from the monastery side? The Chinese also set up schools and many children were going to the school. What were they talking about those things?   

**A:**  At that time, the monastery and the people didn't like it very much. They were saying, "If we were able to [conveys wanted to do] that kind of work , we can do that [ourselves]. But it is not alright to do the work that the Chinese make us do." They had that kind of strong feeling. But many important people were going there. And at that time, making remarks or telling opinions was not popular [Tib. དར་ཡོད་མ་རེད]. So people were just talking privately.   

**Q:**  I heard that some people were seized and beaten and they teased the students and called them "greedy students." [Tib. ལྟོགས་སླའི་སློབ་གྲྭ་བ]. But I didn't hear in detail about that.   

**A:**  At that time, there was a singer called, "Well-shaped or good looking (Tib. སོབཏ་ཡགཔོ" [Tib. བཟོ་ཏ་ཡག་པོ]) in Lhasa. He used to sing the song with the words, "Leaving aside the fire wood, we don't want to use horns for fuel. Leaving aside the Dalai Lama, we don't want to be liberated." [Tib. ཤིང་འདི་གཤགས་པ་བཞག་ནས་རུས་ཁོག་བུད་ལོང་མི་འདུག། ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་བཞག་ནས་བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་གཏོང་ལོང་མི་འདུག]. The people of Lhasa and the monks of the great monasteries liked him very much.   

**Q:**  Was he an actor or just a singer?   

**A:**  He was just singing in the Barkor Street and he was always singing something that offended the Chinese. Nobody was telling him to sing. He was singing his own patriotic opinions.   

**Q:**  Do you remember any other songs sang in the 1950's? There were a lot of songs before the Chinese arrival like the songs regarding Surkhang and Reting. Probably, there was not much in the 1950's.   

**A:**  Before the Chinese arrival, the Kudrak Langjungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ] was the Governor of Kham [Tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]. I just remember like a dream what my teacher told me. After Langjungwa came back to Lhasa, he was kind of punished and resigned from the post of the kalön and Surkhang was appointed as his replacement. Tsipön Driyü [Tib. འབྲི་ཡུལ] had resigned and Shakabpa was appointed as the tsipön. So the people of Lhasa sang the song with the words, "The horn of the ox was broken and a flag was erected at the corner." In Tibetan "Lang" means ox and "Sur" means corner. It means Langjungwa's horn was broken and the flag was erected at Surkhang's. Another wording was, "The shoulder blade of the yak was broken and the hat bought the label." [Tib. འབྲི་གཡག་སོག་པ་བཅག་ནས་ཞྭ་མོས་ལན་ཨུར་ཉོས་སོང]. In Tibetan dri means female yak and sha means hat. It means the shoulder blade of Driyü was broken and Shakabpa bought the label on his hat. This was sung in the Barkor Street and there wasn't any law against doing that. It was a kind of democracy. Nobody was saying anything about singing [such] songs.   

**Q:**  Do you remember any other songs in 50's after the Chinese arrived? In you remember any new songs please write them down.   

**A:**  At that time, I just remembered the words, "We don't want to be liberated." In the past, when the 13th Dalai Lama went to India, the Chinese invited the Panchen Lama to Norbulinga and later to the Jokhang. After that, a war was made with the Chinese and when the Chinese were losing the war, the Panchen Lama could no longer stay as the replacement of the Dalai Lama. I am not sure whether the Panchen Lama himself had this thought, but the Chinese might have the idea [for the Panchen Lama to replace the Dalai Lama. So the people in Lhasa sang a song with the words, "On the top of the Jokhang, there was a stylish young monk. If the day hadn't broken out, he was planning to steal things." [Tib. ལྷ་ས་བླ་བྲང་ཐོག་ཁར། ཨེན་ཆུང་བྱེད་བཟོ་དོད་པོ། ནམ་དེ་ལང་པས་མ་གཏོགས, རྐུན་མ་རྐུ་མཁན་རེད་བཞག]. Probably, they meant that if the Dalai Lama hadn't come back, you [Panchen Lama] were planning to replace the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival, probably people were kind of stunned and didn't have many songs to sing, right?   

**A:**  Probably there were some, but I was not that attentive about the songs. Furthermore, I was a monk and I was also quite busy.   

**Q:**  What were you doing in the years 1953-54? Did you stay in the monastery?   

**A:**  Actually, I should have stayed in the monastery, but during the summer we didn't have many people at my [natal] home so I had to go to the north for trading [with nomads]. I used to come back in winter and my brothers and my servants then used to go to Kalimpong to sell the wool. I used to buy wool and send it to Phari and they sold half of the wool in Phari and the other half of the wool in Kalimpong. We also sold a lot of wool to your trader called Tsering La and we also sold wool to Pandatsang [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང].   

**Q:**  Maybe he was our trader staying in Shigatse, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we were also mahjong playmates.   

**Q:**  How was the wool business after the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  It became much worse after the Chinese arrival because we couldn't sell the wool to India.   

**Q:**  Was that because the Americans refused to buy that, right? {Note: the U.S banned the importation of Tibetan wool because Tibet had become part of Communist China]   

**A:**  I didn't know about that in detail. Later it was written in the People's Association's petition that on the pretext of the Chinese government having relations with the Local [Tibetan] Government, the Americans are not buying the wool and yak tail and skins. When they didn't buy the wool, it affected the religious offerings because many traders were taking loans from the three great monasteries, the private treasury of the Dalai Lama, Dzöbu [Tib. མཛོད་སྦུག] and the Laja Treasury Office, so if they couldn't do the wool business, leave alone the interest, they were unable to repay the principal and they were unable to exchange the wool into money. This was because of the Chinese arrival in Tibet. And the reason why the things became rare in the market, was because some people bought the things when it was cheap and sold them when it was expensive. The main cause was because a large number of People's Liberation Army came into this small country and it had a bad effect [Tib. དོ་ཕོག] on the people's livelihood. We, the people were doing some business going to the south and north and we just had the ration grain barely enough for the year and we didn't have any surplus. So this had a bad effect on the people. For the friendship between the Chinese and the Tibetan, the Chinese can leave an official and his bodyguards. Other soldiers should be withdrawn. This was the point that caused the Chinese to feel pain in their hearts. There were many other points like this.   

**Q:**  After many soldiers came to Tibet, the Chinese soldiers need a lot of things that they wanted to import from India like glass, steel sheets, cloth and towels. When the traders did this business, didn't they become very rich all of a sudden?   

**A:**  Yes, they became very rich. The traders in Lhasa who were doing import business from India made great profits. For example, if you were going to India and you had 5,000,000, the Chinese will lend you 5,000,000, and you had to import all the things that the Chinese wanted.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese pay the money in advance?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese tell them what they wanted?   

**A:**  Yes, like tooth-paste, toothbrushes, Parker 51 fountain pens, Sheaffer fountain pens and another kind of clumsy pens made in US. Dried milk from US. Steel sheets, kelp, blue black serge material and jeans --khaki color jeans-- and Western watches and Rolex watches. Anyway, the Chinese were buying all of the import goods from India.   

**Q:**  So for many traders, business was good, right?   

**A:**  Later, the Chinese didn't lend the money when they were kind of satisfied with their needs and they just ordered the traders to buy the things and fixed the date for them to be delivered. At that time, there were no vehicles, so it was transported with pack animals so when there was a delay, the Chinese didn't accept it and made the traders suffer. When the Chinese didn't accept kelps which was said to be good for people having goiter and for people singing opera songs, this item had a smell like soda, the Tibetan wouldn't use it. The Chinese used to put it in a kind of soup. And they also ordered kerosene lamps and No 10 cigarettes, three castle cigarettes and a crown brand cigarette which the Tibetans called "Sir's hat." Sabsha [Tib. སབ་ཞྭ].   

**Q:**  At that time, when the trader's business was good, were there many people thinking about politics?   

**A:**  After the Chinese arrival, people did know that it was not alright and they were grumbling about that. But they couldn't leave their business. My family were also involved in trading and we didn't have any choice but to do the business. At that time, the most broad minded people were thinking that it is not alright if we don't send the children abroad for study. Otherwise, the traders didn't have any other thoughts.   

**Q:**  When did that kind of thinking start? Was that in 1952-53?   

**A:**  People didn't have that kind of thinking.   

**Q:**  At that time, people thought that the situation would be okay. and some of the students who were in India also came back to Tibet in 1952.   

**A:**  Furthermore, the Chinese had a pleasant tone at that time. Our people were kind of honest and we thought that the Chinese won't tell lies and we had a kind of hope. Except a few bad people, the Tibetans always keep their word. At that time, when we lent money to other people, we felt kind of ashamed to say that I want a receipt for the loan because it seemed that we didn't trust them. But now we don't need to feel ashamed. At that time, people were kind of descent [Tib. ཡ་རབས].   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to China, were you staying in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, what were the people thinking and what were they saying?   

**A:**  The majority of the people were worried that the Dalai Lama might not be able to come back. The Chinese might act tactfully and have fascinating conversations, so that the Dalai Lama would have to stay in China though he was unwilling to do that. There were many people saying that it was wrong [for the Dalai Lama to go to China], but the people's opinions couldn't reach up there. There were the abbots of the great monasteries, but they were just repeating whatever the kudrak were saying like repeating prayers. If it would be done exactly according to the ideas of the abbots, it was okay. But, the abbots themselves were also greedy [Tib. ལྟོགས་སླ] for getting something.   

**Q:**  In the 50's, the Reform or Legjö office was set up, what did you hear about that in the monastery? Did you hear that the estates that belonged to the monastery will be eliminated? Did you hold kind of meetings in the monastery?   

**A:**  We could guess that the estates that belonged to the monastery will be eliminated and we thought that it would be okay because even if we didn't have the estates, we will be given a kind of basis [Tib. རྟེན]. The monks who knew the main point of the matter were thinking that the estates are not that useful [to the ordinary monks]. For example, the Sera Jiso [Tib. སྤྱི་བསོ] had many estates and all of the incomes and expenditures of the estates were managed by two people. When they get the profit, they will take possession of it and they were regularly being stingy [in supplying things to the monks]. And when their term of office was over, they used to give a big amount of alms to the monks and they became kind of famous. When I recollect those things it was really meaningless. Actually, the monks need to have a good livelihood regularly.   

