# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0061.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 9 June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 71  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Temba [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ] is originally from Lhasa from the household called Tsongkhang Sarpa [“New Shop”]. He became a monk in Sera Monastery and then became a chandzö (manager), but was mainly involved in trade in northern Tibet. In this interview, he discusses how monk soldiers were sent to fight in Chamdo in 1950 and then in detail about the People’s Association of 1951-52.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0061_01/H_0061_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Whether you want to start from 1949 or 1950, during this time where were you?   

**A:**  Actually, I was a resident of Lhasa and Sera monastery. I am a monk from Sera and my house is called New-Shop (Tib. Tsongkhang Sarpa [ཚོང་ཁང་གསར་པ]) in Lhasa. When I was in Lhasa, I stayed there and if not there, then I stayed in the monastery, right? Towards 1949 when there was the war at Chamdo, I was at Dam [Tib. འདམ], which was in the north. I was a trader and our house was a trading family. My father and paternal uncle died when I was young. Though we were many children, I was the one who was staying at home because the other children were married off. Whether I was able to take the responsibility or not, it was our Tibetan custom to do whatever one can, isn't it? So I was just sent and it so happened that at that time I was there [in the north doing trading]. When I was at Dam, it happened [the Chamdo war occurred]. It was said that the deities were at war [Tib. ལྷ་དམག]. We were staying in a tent, as traders do. During that time, we heard loud noises like, "dang dang," and we wondered what it was. So I told my brother Lhayön [Tib. ལྷ་ཡོན], "Lhayön, maybe some animals are getting stuck on the tent ropes; take a look". He said, "No, Chandzö, there is a lot of shooting going on in the upper part of Reting". So I said, "Oh, there must be robbers and so we must be careful". Then I said that since we were quite a number of traders bandits would not dare to come. So it was during this time that Chamdo was lost and in Central Tibet these were the signs [of bad things]. During the time we were in the north, monk soldiers called Sermag [Tib. སེར་དམག] were sent from the three great monasteries. The way it was done was that from each tratsang (college), 25 monks were sent. In Tibet, there were differences in the size of the tratsang (colleges). In Drepung, Loseling and Gomang were the largest ones and Deyang and Ngagpa were the smaller ones. In Sera, Sera Mey and Jey were the largest colleges and Ngagpa was the smaller. Regarding Ganden, I don't know. Most probably they were about the same, I think. So from the larger tratsang 25 persons went and from the smaller ones 10 monks went. So each tratsang had a leader who was given the rank of gyagpön [officer in charge of 100 troops]. When I was at Dam I heard that the Sermag departed, but I did not know how they left, so when I got to Lhasa [I learned that] it happened in this way . When the Sermag left, the Lhasans burned a lot of incense and offered prayers saying, "May the Buddhist faith last forever and may the politics of the Tibetan government [Tib. གཞུང་དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང་ཆེན་པོའི་ཆབ་སྲིད] not encounter obstacles." So there was a great outburst of prayers, and stones were lined up [Tib. རྡོ་སྟར] with two lines of white and yellow chalk. In Tibetan custom, this was considered to show respect for the departure. When the Sermag went towards Kham, it coincided with the time Lhalu was coming back from thee so they were together at Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ] for quite some time. From Lharigo, they went to Kongpo Giamda. The Sermag were aggressive and ready for action, being monks, and being young [and brash] . To tell you the truth, they wanted action and didn't know and care about the number of troops, etc. They had enough pride to feel that one of them could kill a thousand Chinese soldiers. You know, we have the brazen pride [Tib. གླེན་རྟགས་ཀྱི་སྤོབས་པ]. Lhalu, however was an experienced person and had also worked for the government. He was also Doji and would have heard about the Chinese strength. So Lhalu stopped them, saying that this was really not the way to go. Finally, Lhalu sent the Sermag back, but he stayed behind. And so regarding this, a lot of opinions were expressed . So when they returned they were told by the monastery, "You people were purposely sent for this reason, but you don't have anything to say. It is like the proverb, "The arrow was shot over there but the arrow point hit on this place." [Tib. མདའ་དེ་ལ་བརྒྱབས་ནས་རྡེའུ་དེ་ལ་ཕོག]. It is not alright for you to come back just listening to Lhalu, who is just one person. Anyway, it is something that is already done so there is nothing to be done. Whatever it is, you should have had at least come face-to-face [confrontation] with the Chinese. Though Chamdo has been lost, the Chinese are still there on our territory and so you must meet them. Just coming up here like a messenger, without even doing that much [is wrong]." So at that time there was strong criticism and the monasteries and Lhalu were also at odds. They said that Lhalu tricked them and sent them up [back to Lhasa]. And that maybe he even got bribed with money secretly by the Chinese to send the monks back. So at that time, strong criticisms were expressed. Anyway, they returned without fighting and then after some time Lhalu himself came up. When he came to Lhasa, regarding his own work there wasn't any good impressions. .   

**Q:**  Yes, as you were mentioning, Lhalu came up [back to Lhasa].   

**A:**  Yes, he came up and there were many opinions about him, but it sort of died out like the proverb, "The fire extinguished naturally." [Tib. མེ་རང་ཡལ] Then the Chinese came and everyone was thinking that this was not going to be good at all. Then the [Tibetan] representatives went down [to Beijing] for the peace process. When they did this, the people in Lhasa were thinking that the talks should be in Lhasa since the government was there. If not, then some other place should be worked out because once you go down [to Beijing] there would be nothing but a loss. So it seems that this was he way the thoughtful people were thinking. I heard this later. At that time, we were young and not very conscious. Seyshika Tsenamla [Tib. ཟས་གཞིས་ཀ་ཚེ་རྣམ་ལགས] who was my maternal uncle who lived below the Tsarong house, was married to the queen of Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] who was very closely related to you [to Paljor Tsarong].   

**Q:**  Yes, yes, my grandfather sent her as a bride to Powo.   

**A:**  Yes. Her husband is my uncle. So my uncle mentioned that things didn't work out and so the 17-Point Agreement was signed. In the agreement, there were a lot of great sounding things, but finally regarding religious beliefs, it said that the in point 60 of the constitution called the Common Programme [Ch. gong tong gang ling] it said that there was no religion. Likewise, the army was to change to the People's Liberation Army. The Military Headquarters, Magjigang was to be turned over to the Chinese and the flag was to be changed. The money that was already printed was to be changed with the Chinese dayan. So regarding these things it was said that this is not alright. So there was this talk in the monasteries, the regiments and in the sweet tea shops where all classes of people came. The higher government officials do not come [to the sweet tea shops] but the younger ones who were in their twenties used to come. Specially a lot of the young monk officials came. So while such talk was being said, the meetings of the People's Association began. The reason for this was that in the 17-Point Agreement it was said that we are not going to bully the Tibetan people at all. However, if the people appeal to China saying that they wish to have reforms, then we will do the reforms. So the people rose up and said that they need to make a petition to the Chinese. So in this way it seems that this was the Water Dragon Year People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས] started. This is what the elders told us. When I entered the Water Dragon Year People's Association, they had practically finished making the document and all. We were called to meet in Jaralinga [Tib. སྦྱར་རག་གླིང་ག]. This was right after the Mönlam Prayer Festival [of 1952]. At that time our leaders were Sera Mey Chandzö Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], and Tsha Trunyi Lodrö Phüntso [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག་བློ་གྲོས་ཕུན་ཚོགས]. He was the son of a nanny of your [Tsarong] house. There also were Drepung Loseling College's Jayan Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ] and Karkhang Phüntso Tashi [Tib. དཀར་ཁང་ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས], and Gurteng Jola [Tib. གུར་སྟེང་ཇོ་ལགས]. They all read out the petition's 6 points and signed it so this is how the Water Dragon Year People's Association started. The petition was being agreed to, but at the same time there were feelings that the Chinese might arrest the leaders and so we also got ready for this. When the petition was being handed, at this moment the Ütsang representative Namgyal Wangdula [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས་ལགས], you know him?   

**Q:**  The one that has the shop?   

**A:**  No. He is an former 22nd regiment commander. He was the head of the new camp in Mysore who was beaten up by the people of camp #4. So Namgyal Wangdula was also there. The Trapchi soldier Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ] was there, and then so was Amdo Samdru [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ]. From the Drepung and Sera sides, there were quite a lot of us from our age who were there. Some are in Nepal. So the petition stated that, "You have said that you have come to help the Tibetan people, but from our perspective it just doesn't correlate. We in the south, trade in the north and vice versa and we don't have much production and ours is a country where we are just barely self-sufficient and so with so many of you coming here all of a sudden, we automatically suffered rather than profited. Likewise, most of our people are like traders and even the traders are having a lot of trouble with no trade. Most of the capital belongs to religious institutions and the government, so we borrow from them and pay the interest. So that's how we live our lives and so this is now being disrupted. Earlier, there were a lot of trade in wool and yak tails, musk and many other things between Tibet and India. So since the relations between Tibet and China began, all this trade has also been blocked and so we suffer. Likewise, the wealthier households buy when there is plenty and sell when its scarce and so this is also causing problems. The greatest difficulty is the Chinese army, the people and the workers who are increasing daily [Tib. ཇེ་རྒྱས་ཇེ་འཕར]. Since the early days the Tibetans and the Chinese have had relations and so in this regard if you keep one Chinese representative and some soldiers for his protection then it is alright. The rest should be withdrawn. At the borders, we are told that foreign imperialists would harm us, but to this day we have not had such problems with the foreign imperialists. So we don't need protection at the borders and so please withdraw border soldiers. We have our own arms and soldiers just enough though they maybe small. We never attack, but if we are attacked, we do have the capability to make a reply and our soldiers have training also. If, however, we cannot manage, then we will request China's help and so help us at that time. So the words were something to this effect. A somewhat more detailed account is in the Ütsang white book.   

**Q:**  Yes, Yes, I've seen that.   

**A:**  The reason being that I got a copy of the petition itself which I gave to the Ütsang group. At that time, I gave them the copy, but it was not that detailed [in the magazine]. The people seemed to be not highlighted. About 75% of it is in the magazine. Anyway, the Chinese were not listening to it and they said that the two sitsab are behind the Water Dragon Year People's Association and that the two are American spies. So this is how they made them notorious outside. More than that, they also gave this lecture. Only later I came to know, but there were occasions when I think when the government and the Chinese did meet often. The two sitsab were being very tough and so the Chinese did not like this and said that they will cause a great rift [Tib. རྒྱབ་འགལ] between China and the local government and so the two have to resign. So Zhang Jingwu and the others seem to have said this. Of course, what they said cannot be the procedure. However, finally they asked the Dalai Lama and though he did not wish to he had to give them leave reluctantly. It was like going through the motions of asking for the resignation and granting it.   

**Q:**  Yes. Now the Chinese were saying that the two sitsab were involved. Some say that it is possible that some government officials were involved. The reason being that if there wasn't a secret connection, then it would be very difficult for the people to get together. So this is what is said. Anyway, from my perspective what does it matter today even if government officials were involved or not, isn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right?   

**Q:**  Whether the government was against the Chinese or the people did that, what does it matter. Anyway, at this time, how did it begin and were their connections with any government officials.   

**A:**  There were no connections with the government officials. When they first met, though I was not at the meeting, you know my uncle Sheshika Tsenamla, well Tsenamla and the leaders that I mentioned earlier met in a park behind Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང]. I forgot the name of the park. So when they met there and had everything set, my maternal uncle reported it to the Chinese and the organization could not do anything. Oh, the name of the park is Wangchen Linga [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་གླིང་ག]. So nothing could be done and things were left alone for a while. Then after some time they thought and said that it is a matter of the Buddhist faith and so we have to do something. Compared to these days, their thoughts were very great. Except for a lack of language and writing skills, they were broad thinkers, and were decisive and bold. As we look at things today, such people are not in existence today. That is the way they were, each one more capable than the other. They were really ones who put their lives on the line. There were no government officials involved at all. Let alone that, I do not even have suspicions that they were involved. The reason being that if the kudrak were put in the organization, then they were suspicious that they will consort with the enemy [Tib. ཕྱི་མ་ནང]. At that time the people considered the kudrak to be two-headed and there was no faith in them. The moment Chamdo was lost and the 17-Point Agreement was signed, the kudrak were under suspicion. It is not like today where one can say something. In those days, the rulers ruled and the people gave way but one could not say anything openly. So they were under suspicion and there would never be any connections.   

**Q:**  Generally, if there were some political talk floating around, maybe it was in the sweet tea shops. But but how did the talk get around.   

**A:**  Generally, the talk spread in the sweet tea shops. For example there would be 2-5 people in the sweet tea shops, right? There would be various things said but it was unanimous as far as the challenging the Chinese. However, the various methods to do this could be different. And so in the sweet tea shops to the ones that one could trust more one would say, "Come to my house when you are free sometime, do come." So one person meets and then two, then three, etc. For example, we would gather at Chandzö Thamjö Sonamla's. Another place to meet was Gusho Jayan Dawala place. Our teacher, Chagdrung Lodrö Phüntso [Tib. ཕྱག་དྲུང་བློ་གྲོས་ཕུན་ཚོགས] was another place to meet. Kamekang Chöndze was another place.   

**Q:**  What about Tsha Trunyila?   

**A:**  Tsha Trunyila is the son of Tsarong's nanny Tsering Dromla. He was a monk in our tratsang (college). He was good in writing and he was made a secretary. After that he became a chandzö. He was known as Chagdrung Lodrö Phüntso. In the Ütsang book he is referred to as Chagdrung Lodrö Phüntso. He was both chandzö and clerk. .   

**Q:**  In the Ütsang magazine there is also a mention of this name though I doubt she was there at that time. The name of the heroine, Pamo Künsangla [Tib. དཔའ་མོ་ཀུན་བཟང་ལགས].   

**A:**  Yes, Yes, she was there!   

**Q:**  In 1952? I thought her role was in 1959?   

**A:**  No, No, she was there. In the Ütsang magazine there is mention of Gurteng Jola. Künsangla was the one who brought him . That I can tell you for sure . Now Künsangla and my teacher are very close. They are also related. Künsangla is the daughter of Tsarong Chandzö . Our teacher is the son of Tsarong nanny Sonam Dromala. She is very old.   

**Q:**  Yes, my father mentioned that.   

**A:**  Yes, he is her son. I have also been to your house many times to see Amala. I was young and their student. Amala used to give me sweet tea. At that time sweet tea was not that well known to me, but the tea used to taste so good.   

**Q:**  Yes, my father mentioned someone by the name of Bu Ane [Tib. བུ་ཨ་ནན], I wonder who that was. My father was working in the Shangdab electricity project. Anyway I think that was later.   

**A:**  Could he have been called Lachung [Tib. བླ་ཆུང]?   

**Q:**  It's said that Thamjö Sonamla was the steward at Shangdab.   

**A:**  Yes it could be.   

**Q:**  Then my father said that a son of our nanny was there.   

**A:**  The nanny's son is Chagdrung Lodrö Phüntso, my teacher.   

**Q:**  I see. I see. Later, wasn't an investigation done by the Kashag.   

**A:**  This is how that happened. The petition was handed in right? The Chinese, as I mentioned earlier, shoved a hat on it right? . So when they put that hat on, the Kashag met regarding the banning of meetings by the people. The Kashag then gave a proclamation saying that such a thing called Water Dragon Year People's Association has arisen in this manner and so from this day on they are not permitted to meet. This was a nationwide proclamation. So the Water Dragon Year People's Association was abolished and the two sitsab too were dismissed. The Chinese put the hat on [blamed them]. So it was said that in Tibet we are not able to do any work and it is better if we go abroad. During this time we believed greatly in America . So we said that we should first go to India and then try and contact the English and the Americans and if help came from there then we could make preparations from this side. So Kamikang Chöndze and his servant Wangchuk [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག], who is in Mussoorie these days. Kamikang Chöndze's name was Phüntso Tashi. He was sent to India by the Water Dragon Year People's Association. When this was done, Chöndzela took a long time at Shigatse. At Shigatse, it is said that Wangchuk had a woman. Then when he was drinking beer he sort of lost control of his mouth and some talk came out that made the Chinese suspicious. So he was arrested and at Lhasa, five of them, Jayan Dawala, Thamjö Sonamla, Chagdrung Lodrö Phüntso and Gomang Drubto [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ], Tongsum Jola [Tib. སྟོང་གསུམ་ཇོ་ལགས] were arrested. Kamikang Chöndze and Wangchuk were arrested at Shigatse. They were arrested simultaneously at a specified time. When they opened the document, I don't know what they found but they found something damaging. So Kamikang Chöndze was brought to Lhasa and he was at first locked up at Langdün [Tib. གླང་མདུན] House. Later he was returned to Tromsikang. They were locked up for I think more than 2 years in the Tromsikang. [repeats].   

**Q:**  Now you were at Sera, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Which tratsang?   

**A:**  Tratsang Mey.   

**Q:**  And your teacher was?   

**A:**  Chagdrung Lodrö Phüntso.   

**Q:**  So he was there right?   

**A:**  Yes, our leader. I was also in the Water Dragon Year People's Association and I became a rather strong sponsor for meeting its expenses.   

**Q:**  During this time who were other sponsors in the monasteries.   

**A:**  In the monasteries, there were many monks who were in the Water Dragon Year People's Association. And there were members from the military. I don't recall whether it was the Jadang Regiment, but there was a rupön, a very brave one and he was there too. Then there was a Tsarong Jola called Lachungla. He stayed at Phari. Jola was also there. They were people who were generally famous around Lhasa. Among those not so famous, there were so many. There were many Trapchi soldiers, and Drepung monks. Then there was a very big trader from Markham called Tsongpön Samjö [Tib. ཚོང་དཔོན་བསམ་ཆོས]. Then there was a monk from Muru Monastery. He had been disrobed. Then there was the ex-monk official [Tib. ཞབས་ཟུར] of Muru Ta Lama [Tib. རྨེ་རུ་ཏ་བླ་མ]. He was very literate. He was there. When we lost the land [in 1959], he was staying at the house in front of Karmashag [Tib. སྐར་མ་ཤག].   

**Q:**  Beside Lhasa, how far did it reach to other towns. For example, those nearby Lhasa.   

**A:**  Around Lhasa, there were people from all over. Then there were some from Phari and also Shigatse. But Shigatse was problematic because there were miser (serfs) of Labrang and the government and so they were secretive about it and did not organize too widely. In Gyantse I was told that there were many in places like Gyantse and Paldi [Tib. དཔལ་དི], Rongchamchen [Tib. རོང་བྱམས་ཆེན] and in Kharka [Tib. mkar kha] which is part of Gyantse.   

**Q:**  I have seen some things that were written by the Chinese and they mention in detail on many points. One thing they wrote was that a large number of people rose up and went to Zhang Jingwu's residence. They climbed over the walls and there was a lot of demonstrations.   

**A:**  It was like this. We, the People's Association gave the petition at Zhang Jingwu and Alo Buzhang's residence. So we went there many times shouting slogan that we want a reply to the petition. On one occasion word leaked out that we were going to shout slogans and so the two, it seemed had called the Shapes to their residence. They knew that the People's Association were coming at a certain time and that we would be shouting from the outside saying that we want replies to our 6 points and that it is shameful that a large country is bullying a small one. Since it was from the "people's" mouths, all kinds of things would be said, right? So it is said that the two of them were really scared. The reason nothing happened to the two, like loosing their lives, was that Chanzdö Thamjö Sonamla was a very great man. He told the people, "You people going inside and hoping to kill one or two Chinese, don't ever wish a thing like that. If you kill a Chinese leader then we in Lhasa would get it. These people are ones who have absolutely decided to serve the communist system, our property is in Lhasa and we would just end up fighting among ourselves and robbing each other and we cannot challenge the Chinese outright. However, shouting and throwing stones is our capability. So he was advising such things on the side. On one occasion when he was giving such advise, I was going in and Namgyal Wangdula was coming out. He must have been advised the same. He advised me likewise. The reason being that I was the Sera Chandzö, and whether the chandzö is capable or not it is like the discipline of the military and the monks have discipline and so one can give commands. So that is what he told me. We went to his house [Zhang Jingwu's] about 2-3 times. On one occasion, there was talk that the Shapes even slept in their house. I don't know whether this was actually the case or not. It is said that they were told that they [shape] had to stay there since they were so scared. So its said that all the kalön were kept there that night. There were people who kept watch and they said that nobody went out and so they kept them there. In the sweet tea shops we even joked around saying that they must have felt cold that night since they probably had no bedding with them .   

**Q:**  So during this time, what preparations had the Chinese made. For example, setting up bunkers, and were people stopped from moving about at night? How was it?   

**A:**  They set up battlements as soon as we had given the petition, but they did not begin general arrests. They did not bully us at that time. They only bothered the government. Later, just after 1959 [mistake], they did. At Metrogongkar we Sera Mey had an estate called Phangmey [?]. The road construction was to begin on some of these fields. Monks, however, are very decisive and they said that you people cannot make a road on our fields. There was this monk called Tsalog who argued with the Chinese. They ganged up on him and arrested him and was locked in Surkhang House. So I think that was the first arrest and it was after that time that they got bolder.   

**Q:**  What about the shops. Did they close?   

**A:**  The shops did not close. If there was a fight, forget about supporting [the demonstrators], they were concerned that something might happen to them. So it was not foreign custom where they say that shops and restaurants should close [in solidarity]. We didn't even understand these things.   

**Q:**  They were just worried about their items.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Now did the Kashag not call quite a lot of members of the People Association? And how did this happened?   

**A:**  In this Surkhang was definitely there. Then there was Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] Khenjung.   

**Q:**  Since Surkhang was a kalön. I don't think he would come, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes, he was there. This was an law case investigation committee [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ]. Surkhang was there because I had even gone to meet him because Surkhang Khenjung was my a mahjong companion. So my teacher told me to go and tell Surkhang. I said that I can't go and tell the Sawang, but I can tell Khenjung. So I had been there twice. Once, to see kalön Wangdü Dorji [Tib. དབང་འདུས་རྡོ་རྗེ] [in Dharamsala].   

**Q:**  What was the reason?   

**A:**  To expedite the matter since at this time they were locked up. To request them to expedite the matter soon.   

**Q:**  I see. So how was the matter settled and how long did it take?   

**A:**  It took about 2 years and 7 months.   

**Q:**  Two Years?   

**A:**  Yes. They were arrested at the end of 1952 and they were even locked up when the Dalai Lama went to China.   

**Q:**  When the People Association first started was that in 1952?   

**A:**  Yes, 52. I think it began before the Water Dragon Year. The reason it was called Water Dragon was that it began in the 2nd or 3rd month of the Water Dragon Year. So that was the time the petition was given to both the Tibetans and the Chinese. So the name came from the time of the petition. The starting date was before that. I don't know what year. [He is looking at the calendar].   

**Q:**  So the preparations were done in 51?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Around winter time, with the New Year's and all, it must have been difficult to organize.   

**A:**  I'm glad you asked me that since I just remembered something. In 1951 there was the Sera Shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] [Yogurt Festival] in the 8th month, from day 2 onwards. There was a 7 days picnic [Tib. ཆབ་ཞུགས] with opera performances. So by then they had started their work. At that time, I invited my teacher to the picnic and some time had already sometime since they started. So it was at that time that he told me, "You have to come. You have a lot of young followers [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག], right?"   

**Q:**  So, that's about it for today.   

